Goldshire build in Valheim! Tried to capture as much detail as I could. The path leads all the way back to Stormwind, and I will be detailing the forest with the graveyards etc. Next stop Lakeshire. Hope you like it!

Well, looks like I'm re rolling a human warrior for the hundredth time. God damn starting zone music.

This is scarily accurate. Awesome job! How long did it take you?

Thanks! I've been on and off for almost a week so probably about 3 full days!

Having done some base building in Vallheim myself, I totally recognize the effort that went into this. Looks amazing man. I am catching the feeling of the zone in it. Great details in the inn aswell.

Having 300 hours of pure building time on Valheim, this build makes me want to sink another 300 in...
Seriously well done OP, this is incredibly cool.
This is beautiful. And why does that music always hit me in the heart?
Walking through Goldshire right now. Even the trees are placed properly and with the same relative width and tree type...
Are you okay? This is amazing to the point of concern.
Is that with the games normal weight physics turned off? I remember those were brutal lol
I would assume it's done in creative mode, would be hard to get the dvergr there without spawning them. Also I think the only way to get the barrels there would be spawning them in too
Still takes a lot of time, effort, and thought to do a build like this though!


When I see the title, I was scared that it would required a NSFW tag, lol!

It's safe to assume that's why we didn't get to see the basement of the Inn

Seeing all those rabbits tells me this is moon guard.

Wow it's amaziingg! I can't wait to see your next post 😍

This is gorgeous!! Almost seems like Noblegarden time with all the bunnies too!

Incredible, man! Would love to see updated graphics for a “WoW 2” or something using Unreal Engine 5

Now tame a 2 star boar and name it Princess

Have you uploaded that to YouTube as well? The Reddit player is painfully bad and I'd like to see this in high quality. Looks like you've done an AWESOME job.

Awesome!!!!

Dude this is insane I love it

Next up full stormwind build!

Started on it almost a year ago but it was so much work!

It always makes me happy when I see posts like this instead of "games sucks now cause x"

This looks great. This is one of my favorite zones in the game.
Can you imagine the Headless Horseman attacking this village? Wild.

Amazing, now you just need to add all the people dueling in front of the inn

There was just something about the music in vanilla that was so pure. Every time I hear it it takes me back to when I was leveling my very first character. No other expansion has had music that memorable. It's the essence of nostalgia for me with wow.

This is what hit me too. Massive nostalgia wave. Tirisfal, Goldshire, and Eversong are my favourites.

Well done dude this is beautifully done

Now build a Moonguard Goldshire and go inside the Inn.

The music does so much of wow. If only newer wow had this good music.

Wow this is amazing my dude! Only missing the MoonGuard touch to give it that wholesome RP look :P

That’s amazing. Nicely done yo

I absolutely adore this! Places from World of Warcraft recreated in other games has got to be my favorite kind of post here. It's always such a treat seeing how lovingly they've been recreated, and how our favorite places look in other game engines! This was a joy to watch, you did a great job :)

Where the night elf bitches at?

Utterly fantastic!! Job well done!! Love it!!

Wtf.. this is so damn impressive!

Omg ily, this was a bucket list thing for me to do

That's awesome. Only needs some female night elves dancing on the tables for this to be on point.

As soon as you went into the inn I almost lost it. I had such a big smile on my face the whole time watching this. I now want to play a wowheim crossover.

Whoa incredible details

So when will you program Yrel in the basement?

Modlist? I recognize some of those build pieces from Odin mods.

That's awesome! Do you have a post about Stormwind as well, or is it a WIP?

Thanks! Yeah I started Stormwind a while back but stopped as I burnt myself out a bit. Here's the link for that video

Badass!! Bravo!! 👏👏👏

I haven't played for a long time but looks like there's been some updates to make this all possible. Looks great

Awesome mate. Everyone should give valheim a try. Bring friends and don’t try to look up how to play. Just figure it out and have an adventure :)

Gorgeous recreation of it! Almost makes me want to re-sub for a bit of nostalgia

As someone who can't play WoW anymore thanks to long term medical side effects, seeing Goldshire reproduced in a game thats become near and dear to my heart is beyond amazing. Thank you for this!

Having built stuff in Valheim, I can’t even begin to imagine what a pain in the ass this was. This is amazing to me, Valheim has always reminded me a bit of WOW for some reason.

This is the coolest build I've seen. You are amazing 🤘🤘🤘

I mean yeah, this is Valheim, but it's modded to the extent where I don't even recognize the game

Absolutely stunning!
Opening part with all the rabbits hopping around made me think of the Noble Garden event currently happening in Goldshire!

Holy shit this looks like it took forever, very well done.

This is looney toons

This is really awesome. Well done! I leave WoW when life gets too busy and resub back when a new expansion hits hoping it would bring with it some of the feeling i still get whenever I portal to Stormwind and know those pesky bandits are right outside the gates. There's simply nothing that can erase that first toon memories of hoofing it to Westfall with a boring ass horse to go do Deadmines with that first green drop

Lakeshire is one of my favourite villages in a game. It's neck and neck with Kakariko village from Ocarina of time on the N64 for me. Love both equally and couldn't pick and outright favourite. Looking forward to your Lakeshire creation 👍🏻

Not Moonguard for sure

Meanwhile, people from the Moon Guard server, be looking at the inside of the inn, and be like, "It's missing something" 😁

Gotta knock points off because I don’t see any naked Draenei dancing on the tables. Good work though

Amazing

Do stormwind next

Makes me wonder what PC you got for it to run that smoothly with all the stuff going on

Anyway, this looks crazy good, well done mate.

This is awesome

is this unmodded version of valheim? or is it imported assets?

Impressive buddy. Awesome stuff.


Holy shit

Wow well done! How long did this take you?

Have an award 🐱

Where's the demon children?

Was so confused if vanilla but no way. Still incredibly awesome and pretty accurate imo

Love love love this

Reminds me of the graphics from that south park episode.

amazing
You are going to give me your world file.
Totally amazing, could you imagine if the whole game looked like this.
I just want to give you props, dude.
I tried playing Valheim and really wanted to enjoy it because it seemed like my cup of tea, but I found the building system to be so janky.
This is impressive.
The building system is the best part of the game and has very little jank compared to any building game except probably minecraft... What exactly was the issues you were having?
As choppy as vanilla! That’s attention to detail
Wow!!
Great work!
Beautiful
Never played valheim but I can appreciate the effort this took for sure. Does this use mods to achieve this look and stuff? Well done op
This is basass dude. Makes me yearn for a WoW 2.0
This is so so good 💪🏻 Great work!
I would re sub if all of wow looks like this
Didn’t recognise it without all the PVP flags and spectators on mounts
Incredible, now add some futa Draenei
Ugh I need an azeroth in valheim
sick build
A whole WoW looking like that might be hella fun to play and enjoy. Just seeing him run around with the music makes me wonder what the classes would feel like. But honestly. Sure looks fun.
Next do Durotar. It'll still just be brown mud :D
This is amazing
meanwhile, Westfall is quite truly on fire.
Great work. Missing the rp and the mailbox with someone dancing for money. ;)
Epic!!
This is so fucking cool, I don't even know where to begin. Awesome, awesome job. Can't wait to see Redridge. It'll be in the Plains, I presume?
This is clearly a labour of love, and gives me Alliance-feels. Back to the login screen I go......
This is amazing! Great work! 🙌
I'm interested, how did you find such a flat terrain seed? Or was it all manually flattened?
That was amazing.
This is amazing!!
This is awesome
King’s honor, friend!
Do razor Hill next
Need someone to start working on Brill.


China needs to establish wage and price controls.
China, Near Shanghai

I'm genuinely confused as to why the NYTimes reports so much on China. I mean, for me, a person living in China, it's helpful to read some of these (largely negative) perspectives (that are typically devoid of any rationale as to why the Chinese government does what it does beyond the assertion that China is a brutal and duplicitous authoritarian state), but why do folks in the States care what China is up to?
Massive trade partner, large economy, and has a different global approach than the US (I am focusing on as neutral as possible terms by the by).    
Hence, it is news by the nature of its existence.
Maybe we have investments.
Because it's the second largest economy in the world.
The same statement is true for the US:
Biden's economic narrative looks different, inflated so to speak, from what is happening on Main Street.
Things in the US are looking pretty good for many on Main St., with very low unemployment and wages rising.
what do you expect? china has simply degenerated into another failing corrupt conservative society tearing the world economy apart.
It's fun seeing all the totally organic commentary from people who are trying to make this story about America and the US economy. Yes, guys, what about America? A classic diversionary tactic
Its  'worst economic slowdown' of last year was ... 3% growth.   And that in the jaws of yo-yo-ing between excessive lockdowns and a huge first national Covid wave.  And that nominal GDP growth must naturally flatten as its population peaks.
No mature economy can or should sustain growth of 6-8% pa.  
China's problems are structural imbalances of the kind that have been features of capitalism.  
1.  High youth unemployment (not unlike Europe) in the face of not just mechanisation but urbanisation.  
2. Undue investment in real estate (familiar to the US, Australia, Ireland, etc, etc).   The BBC reports home ownership of nearly 90% (!)  So there's limited renting.  And up to 25% of owners have a second apartment.  Even discounting the numbers of parents owning a second apartment to help children, that's a huge potential bubble given not many second apartments are 'lifestyle' getaways.
How is that different from here?
The Biden Administration keeps touring its economic achievements, but the average American feels angst over inflation ravaging their purchasing power, unaffordable houses & rents, and continued warnings from professional economics that the U.S. may be heading into a recession.
@Deep Thinker   TBF US employment is strong.   China's youth unemployment rate is very serious.
I forgot to mention Americans are also worried because their credit card debt is now at record highs.
Denying reality (and democracy) for a living while projecting blame for their own corruption and incompetence on imaginary and foreign scapegoats.....the breakfast of dictators, despots and authoritarians worldwide.
(See China, Russia and Republistan for reference)
Hmmmmm why does that sounds eerily similar to how Americans feel?
It is absolutely past time for the US to "decouple" from China. End all missions, exchanges, student visas, and immigration. Just end it. The Nixon experiment failed big time.
The great know-it-all Xi will inevitably make a decree that the economy should be good and it will be good and you better agree or else.
A fertility rate of 1.0 (replacement would be 2.1). That is the key statistic to measure what young Chinese think about their prospects. They have lost confidence in the leadership. And that means transitioning to a consumer-based economy is almost impossible.
A closed information apparatus will always have credibility problems.  Distrust is inevitable when a country is treated like a Potemkin village.
some of this is a 'different way of thinking'. or quite different. housing for instance is doing very good. it's supposed to be down.
Given the Chinese Government’s history of punishing people who speak out, why would all these people openly complain? I still think what we’re. seeing is more about China trying to convince the world they are no threat than a true crisis.
It is a shame that only in China does the media distribute what those on decision making positions want to hear, which excludes criticism of media itself.
How difficult it is to have a functioning economy when the Emperor can suddenly shut it down on a whim. Maybe they will learn one day that change must be aimed at the top in order to solve this.
The Chinese government has stolen the hope of its people.
Welcome to the pains - and gains -  of capitalism! As Dr. M.L. King said, "capitalism does not permit an even flow of economic resources. With this system, a small privileged few are rich beyond conscience, and almost all others are doomed to be poor at some level. That's the way the system works". Capitalism in China should not be viewed only as progress in production, but also in knowledge. For many years, the Fidel Castro regime in Cuba criticized capitalism for not being able to eliminate poverty and he was correct. While capitalism can mitigate poverty through social transfers, it is nearly  impossible to eradicate the processes that create poverty under capitalism. In summary, it seems that poverty is inherent to capitalism, and that a lower standard of living and lower wages are needed in capitalism for its perpetuation. Why should it be different in China?
China is communist, though. Most decisions are made centrally by a politburo. Three years of rigid covid policy, coupled with a real estate boom spurred on by central planning (creating entirely empty cities), is hardly capitalism.
@Cloves 1000% agree. I think what you are saying is absolutely inevitable for a developing consumer economy like China. These are the 'growing pains' if you will.
@Cloves Capitalism is what allowed China to lift 500M+ people from poverty since the late 70s. They are highs and lows but China is vastly richer now.
China is afraid of its people, they tightly regulate what can be said and insist on "Happy Talk."  In the meantime they have a huge problem with unemployed youth, which they won't talk about.  Having millions of unemployed young people with access to the internet is a recipe for major problems.
The other issue is that since no one is allowed to talk about problems, they are ignored and continue to grow until the situations blows up in a catastrophe.  It would be far better to admit there is a problem and work on it while it is small and can be fixed, but that is not how the Chinese system works.
@Bruce1253 if that’s true, why are all these people speaking to Western media?
All the problems confronting China will soon be ours too; but because of its rapid trajectory, it's a bellwether, going through all the stages of a sick economy in quick succession. And you can rest assured, our politicians will be just as unimaginative, craven and deliberately obtuse as their CCP counterparts to address matters before they get ugly. We've temporarily "solved" our problem through record credit card debt, as people struggle to maintain their rapidly dwindling standard of living. You'll never hear this statistic mentioned when we hear about the miracle of Bidenomics, where our economy is literally a house of cards. Diminished employment prospects among the young and educated, and unaffordable housing; it's hard to tell which country I'm referring to. Who, pray tell, is supposed to buy all those EV's rolling out of the factories, when their credit line is zero?
Yes, what about whataboutism?
I visited China in July. My observation there is more consistent with Chinese media than what NYT reports. China’s big problem is the real estate market. It makes everyone hesitate to spend. But otherwise, consumer spending, car sale, and tourism expenditure are going up this year. Apple and Tesla sales are very strong in China, which is also an indication.
China has undergone the largest rural to urban migration in all of recorded history in the past 40 years. It should come as no surprise to anyone that a mass movement of this scale should be accompanied by unrest, inequality, and fading prospects. The Chinese government clams up in times of turmoil which is why we'll never know the true extent of these economic issues.
Rising literacy and GDP per capita means you don't want to work in service rather than production- it's physically easier, more lucrative, and offers the highest ceiling. For the first countries to make this shift, that's fine: the rest of the world continued to make the products these increasingly rich countries could afford to buy in larger quantities
The "problem" is that this process makes producing countries more wealthy. And while the so called "communist" government of China was able to suppress that wealth getting to most of the workforce for decades, that could never be sustained.
Service industry jobs are lucrative because they act as force multipliers for productive industries. Therefore they are very efficient value producers (hence why they are paid more) but only if productive industries are present.
However, while all this is happening, technological development makes productive industries more efficient as well- lowering the need for workers in those sectors. In effect- there's nowhere to fall back to for those transitioning from production to service.
So you have a workforce that demands service industry jobs, a service industry that has increasingly fewer productive industries to service, and productive industries that need less people to function.
This leads to lower demand for everything, products and services, as economies deflate like air leaving a punctured tire. This is the natural progression of capitalism and is unavoidable under this system.
We will be on the same track soon.  Economy is slowing and the feds want it that way to cool inflation.   There’ll be a couple of years of slowdown ahead.  Then the feds will start printing money again.
Almost like in the US, where we constantly get headlines like ‘Biden’s Economy is Great - Why Aren’t Voters Giving Him Credit?’ despite the income to home price ratio growing at record high rates and peoples’ average standard of living getting worse at roughly the same rate it has for decades.
These are interesting stories about a few individuals, and I understand that creating a narrative this way is the core NYT style. But are there any data?  Polls that say how people feel about the economy? About the direction of their country? About their political leaders?  Polls that segment the population in to rich-poor, urban-rural, educated-uneducated?  How about just data like homelessness today versus 10 years ago, changes in the % of the population unemployed, ...  As a reader, I am never convinced by anecdotal story telling.
@John. Agree in the data need but it is also the point of the piece. China government figures are not reliable.  If you do business with China you will hear enough stories to form a reliable view that companies are in travel.  In my business which covers multiple sectors you hear of average order size down, volumes down.  There is a definite problem going into Q4 and 2024.  The real economy of SMEs is slowing significantly.  Add to that the indisputable data available on real estate debt, defaults and the fact this was central to prior years growth.
Are wealthy Chinese insulated from the economic woes? If that were true, they’d return to touring Europe in huge numbers and that hasn’t happened. There have been very few Chinese tourists in Europe this year compared to pre-pandemic years.
the problem is worse than that china is in debt bomb, economic crash and demographic crash.  there is no possible recovery 
only social, economic and governmental crash. a war with taiwan would make worse because to would also kill imports and cause a famine that would kill half chinese population.
From your fingertips to God's eyeballs.
I'd rather lose half a billion Chinese to famine than half a billion Americans, Europeans, and others PLUS half a billion Chinese to the war that they're planning.
Xi might be a terrible leader, but the Chinese Economy is not doomed. Just as Biden and Democratic party led economy are not doomed for failure.
@Frideswide. Not doomed but when has an economic bubble not burst?
No economy is necessarily “doomed,” but all economies wax & wane. It seems “animal spirits” are as much a part of the Chinese hybrid command/control economy as any other. 
Unsurprisingly, the US economy, again, is defying negative expectations. I believe we can thank Biden’s steady leadership. 
On the other hand, Britain appears to be rising up to its pundits negative expectations.
@Sean T Except here you can see new car sales are strong and prices are high, new home sales are strong and prices are high, airline fares are high due to strong demand, and unemployment claims remain low.  Maybe your retail business is just in the wrong trend?  There are signs of weakness in the US economy, but also incredible signs of strength.
@Patrick I said retail but I meant restaurant, which is a mainstream business I think. I own an apartment in Manhattan and the price on that is also down significantly based on building unit sales compared to 2019. Who knows, maybe it’s just Manhattan that is suffering and the rest of the country is doing great. Poll numbers don’t seem to suggest that is the reality though
I wonder if the difficulties you are having are still connected to so many commuters not commuting into NYC for work.
Discouraging people to think for themselves inevitably results in less innovation. China’s economy will suffer—and indeed, already is. The companies of the future will not originate in the country if its government continues to stifle free enterprise.
Just another example how actions have consequences.  
China threatens Taiwan, India, Vietnam, the Philippines, the United States and, indirectly Europe, and they expected business to continue as usual.
@Scott Covid started in Wuhan in the fall of 2019 and China did not warn the world.



Sorry, didn't read the entire article. Let me guess, Republicans oppose this. There is no reason that an agency that pays for billions on these drugs should not use that to leverage better pricing. It's the central pillar of how Walmart runs. Tell the Republicans, "it's just business".
It is absurd that Medicare has EVER been required to pay whatever the monopolistic pharmaceutical companies dictate, especially since they seem to have no objection to negotiating with private health insurance companies and foreign socialized and single'payer medical care systems.
This is a LONG overdue reform (and I personally am quite pleased by it because the two most expensive medications I take, both RIDICULOUSLY expensive, are on the list).
The cost for Xarelto was $498 for a thirty day supply with the use of insurance. If you were able to get from a Canadian pharmacy it was $98 for a thirty day supply.
Negotiation: what a SWAT team with heavy weapons conducts with a criminal.
Negotiation: what the government does with drug companies:
If a manufacturer refuses to negotiate or won’t agree to what federal rules call a “maximum fair price,” the company will face a substantial tax or must withdraw from Medicare and Medicaid
At least call them by some more accurate term.
Big Pharma says that negotiations are a threat to innovation, the only threat is to their profits. What about the research they receive at a reduced cost or free from Government (NIH), shouldn't they pay "fair market value"? I know of a drug that has a copay of $1650 for a 3 month supply, the pharmacy says it saves money to get the 3 month supply.
It's hilariously unfunny that there is a different side of this debate. Republicans are absolutely corrupt and shameless.
When did you first notice this interesting fact?
It's a start. More than any other pres has done for us.
Keep it going, Pres Biden!
Consumers will not see benefits swiftly, with the lower, negotiated prices due to become available in early 2026.
Alas, more trickle-down, eventual benefits, if the patients live long enough to actually experience them.
This morning's early jump upward in the stock prices of major pharmaceutical companies bears this out.
Gotta love Johnson & Johnson. In their court filings they claim that they have a constitutional right to your tax money. God bless them!
Way to go, Joe!
I'm no shill for big pharma, but the industry is hardly the boogeyman in America's dismal industrial healthcare landscape. Few of us would enjoy the lives we lead today absent the miraculous drugs and biologics the industry has been delivering for decades--while generating life-saving, life-altering, and life-enhancing products that dwarf the outputs of virtually every other science- and technology-based industries that are heralded for their products. What Americans pay out of pocket for medicines is solely attributable to the failure of the American political system to provide American citizens and residents with cradle-to-grave health insurance, which is the birthright of hundreds of millions of citizens and residents living in other advanced industrial states.
Lower Medicare/drug costs means lower taxes. Will the GQP buy in?
Thank you President Biden--who understands his mission to serve the public as best as he can.
To win Republican support, that statute included language that prohibited any role for the government to negotiate medication prices. The 2022 Inflation Reduction Act — known as IRA — rescinded the prohibition.
And this is why one has to wonder why any person in their right mind would ever vote for a Republican....especially if they are not wealthy. Democrats work for the common good and the working class. Republicans worship at the altar of greed and corporate money.
I take Eliquis 2.5 mgs twice daily and pay $50 for three months because I am blessed to have great Medical and Prescription Insurance from my retirement plan. If I had to pay the retail price it would be $2,000 plus for the same amount. It seems my Prescription Plan negotiated a better price so should Medicare be denied the same price. I am on Medicare.
I'm not sure why Eliquis is on that list. Go to their website and sign up for discounts - I pay $10 a month now.
Are you on Medicare, and does it apply if you are?
The only reason you get a discount is because someone else is paying full price.
Read the fine print
Bottom line: a political trick designed to mislead. As the article notes, these drugs will be available as low cost generics very soon. Ergo, it's all being done with Big Pharma's interests in mind. LOL
The joke is on you, owl. Big Pharma often makes minor tweaks to the formulations of proprietary drugs just before they are due to go generic, and thereby extending the period they can charge full price for it. They have many ways to manipulate our laws to insure they remain among the most profitable industries not just in the US, but in the entire world.
Republicans have been fighting this for decades. This is one of the bigger wins for Biden and we owe him and his team and the Dems who supported this in Congress a vote of thanks. It is long past due.
WIll be fun to watch Republicans arguing that it's outrageous that the Federal Government is using its massive purchasing power to negotiate lower drug prices for the benefit of all Americans.
Maybe, just maybe, it will begin to dawn on lunch pail Americans that Republicans don't really have their best interests at heart.
For what it’s worth (with life-essential pharmaceutics,, that’s quite a lot), Imbruvica already has at least two descendent drugs that cost knee-buckling amounts of money, literally unaffordable for anyone who is not a multi-millionaire or wealthier who does not have robust health insurance coverage. A long running issue we know about is drugs with clinically minimal modifications being developed that satisfy statutory criteria for qualifying as “a new drug” but clinically are, for all intents and purposes, cosmetic and do not justify the exorbitant prices of those drugs. This phenomenon has been true of drugs to treat diabetes, hypertension, and other chronic health problems.
When dealing with life threatening, life shortening health problems, leaving solutions up to raw capitalism essentially creates a system of extortion, of holding our lives hostage for profits. Those developing life saving, life essential drugs deserve fair compensation, but not “what the market will bear” when the market is people dying. That is a big part of why human societies developed governments in the first place from tribal councils to 500-member parliaments. Either we have equal rights (as defined by equal access) to life saving, life essential medications or we don’t.
so i ask:
although it seems insane, are the nation's seniors currently paying more for drugs than they are for food?
sure looks that way from what i read here?
Health insurance in the US costs they typical family about $10,000. That does not include out of pocket expenses.
Big Pharma is going to hate this. Expect lots of political adds paid for by Big Pharma telling us all that Grandma is going to die if we cut their profits.
This is good example of what Biden is doing to hurt the economy: having Medicare negotiate with drug companies to reduce prices on popular prescription drugs. This is obviously Big Government over-reach into how the private sector operates in the economy. Just because people are dying because they can't afford necessary drugs is no excuse for socialism!
Did you get that from Fox News?
I think it's sarcasm
It won't be when Fox says it.
I can buy these drugs in other countries for a fraction of what they charge here. And we the taxpayer often subsidize the research and clinical trials for these pharma companies, yet we bear the burden of outrageous profits to shareholders and execs.
This is a prime example of quality leadership, for which it would seem you are unfamiliar. Or you forgot /s at the end of your joke.
It's about time.
This is great news, unfortunately like everything else in this country when a president wants to affect real change for it's citizens, your gonna see big pharma ramping up their lobbying, probably lawsuits. But it's us taxpayers that pay for the research on drugs. Big pharma just reaps the profits. At the end of the day this system has to change. All other industrialized countries can negotiate drug prices, except the U.S. Richest country in the world but a third world country when it comes to our health care system and it's drug pricing. We should also prohibit advertising of prescription drugs.
The Washington lobbyists just love this;
Big Pharma will be wheel-barrowing in money to them;
after all, CEOS and BOD can't survive on only a 3000% markup!
Finally. The George W. Bush administration expanded Medicare drug coverage to not include price negotiation because they knew the incoming Obama administration would include it. Seniors like me have doctors who prescribe drugs which may not be the best but what we can afford.
I thought is was because bid pharma financed W.
THIS is why I love Joe Biden for president. Can anyone imagine a trump or DeSantis even countenancing doing something for ordinary people like this?
They are more like one of the early scenes in The Handmaid's Tale where, after rounding up a group of women, they start taking the walkers away from disabled and pushing girls with Down's Syndrome into their own line.
Bad news for Martin Shkreli and his ilk.
Finally! It took three years? I've been waiting for this for quite a while. And why must it be limited to ten?
With all the data and information we have available, this looks like a task that should take three months, not three years.
Glad to see this story got moved to the top of the front page, where it belongs. It is VASTLY more important than Mark Meadows.
A good start, Biden administration!
Now we wait for the outlandish cries of "sOciALiSM!!!!" from the lying Right.
Queue the gloom and doom from big pharma that this will take away our medicines.
That ignores the fact that Britain, France, Germany, and Switzerland all have major pharmaceutical companies, and all regulate the price of drugs.
While the press chases negative narratives and R’s try and distract with cultural boogeymen President Biden keeps working hard for ALL Americans!!
Joe Biden has a special interest group!! The good news is that it is us.
Loving this comment, gandalf!
About time. How many people have died becuase of the high cost of health in this country? Big pharma has NO concerns about the unmet health needs of patients, only their profits.
Not being able to negotiate prices was done by George W.'s administration, specifically Dick I Have not Heart Cheny. This is another reason to vote BLUE. republicans only care about their donors' money.
There are many drugs used to treat immune disorders. I have been on biologics for over twenty years and they have helped me immensely but at HUGE cost (have always had good insurance but that is another matter). As my rheumatologist pointed out to me, when the monthly cost of treatment is essentially the same regardless of the medication it can only be price fixing. It’s blatantly obvious.
I worked in molecular genetics and biology research over thirty years. The pharmaceutical industry knows how to make monoclonals at very large scale. They are profiteering at obscene levels. Has anyone ever seen a forensic audit of the true costs of these biologics?
Welcome to capitalism
Almost all of these drugs are recognizable from advertisements on tv and in publications. Do the drug companies pass on the cost of mass advertising to he consumer? I, for one, am sick of seeing these drug ads…they infer that people can tell their doctor what drug to treat them with. Does anyone read the side effects at the end of the ads? I didn’t think so.
That is the reason that drugs companies advertise. Doctors have a difficult time convincing patients they don’t need an advertised drug. Without advertising, how would we know we have RLS (restless leg syndrome).
Thankfully in Ireland you don’t see ads for drugs. Ever. Not allowed.
Then Ireland would make a good control group to better understand the impact of pharmaceutical advertising on sales and medical outcomes.
Commercials for drugs should be forbidden, like commericals for tobacco. These are not consumer products, since consumers cannot even buy them without a prescription. All this leads to is know-nothing patients badgering their doctors.
“The push for price negotiation faced intense opposition from pharmaceutical companies, which contend that capping potential earning erodes their ability to invest in further research and development.”
No. It will not affect future research. It will just hit the already bloated and obscene bottom line of the drug companies and their investors.
Bingo.
Still seething the makers of Eliquis successfully sued to keep their patent until 2028 when the FDA had at least one generic approved for use. Greed. Pure greed.
Indeed. A family member pays $500 for a months supply. Insurance won't cover it for some mysterious reason.
$504 through my plan. Just found out the manufacturer does have a $10 co-pay card you can sign up for. Haven't tried to use it yet, but the neighbor who told me about it says it has saved her a ton.
But not insulin?
Insulin was already price capped as part of the IRA.
Insulin is already capped.
NovoLog is insulin. It is on the list
I’m glad Biden is doing this, only thing Trump ever did was give tax breaks to the billionaires who own the drug companies.
Another thing Republicans will look to kill if they're in power. Why benefit patients when there are insurance executive pockets to line which turn into campaign contributions? I know people on some of these drugs, they are prohibitively expensive, and I can see why some people go bankrupt, or maybe even just prefer to die. That is the outcome heartless Republicans want. It doesn't happen to them because Congress has Cadillac health insurance. I would say that I hope it happens to someone they love except that they don't know how to love so it wouldn't change a thing.
Thank you President Biden and all the Democrats who made this historic bill possible.
My wife was prescribed an inhaler. Here in the US, $450, per month. In her native Australia, SIX DOLLARS.
My sister got her inhaler from Canada--with her doctor's blessing. It was so expensive in the USA, much cheaper there.
When Biden announced the price cap on insulin I checked the average (?)/median (?) —I can’t remember—price of all insulin delivery methods in OECD countries and it was US$7-8.
Of course, this doesn’t mean Biden didn’t make a reasonable effort, but it demonstrates how terrible our healthcare/insurance system is and how Americans are played for suckers. Yet we have a party (the GQP) that completely opposed Biden’s actions and 40-45% of the population that agrees with the GQP and is willing to get screwed, though 80-90% of them need the discount.
Are inhalers even on the list.
Joe and the Democrats continue to govern to HELP people while the GQP prop up their cult leader, investigates Hunter and may impeach JOE!
VOTE BLUE!
Thank you President Biden for this long overdue, common sense legislation.
And Republicans continue to work and vote against their constituents' best interests.
And those who vote for them do so not realizing how muuch they are hurting themselves.
J&J says it’s worried about how this will affect their ability to address patients’ unmet medical needs, without a hint that they realize the irony of patients currently being priced out of addressing their medical needs. They’re not alone in not getting it, they’re just the only ones who said it out loud.
The cost for Eliquis or Entresto for a Medicare Part D participant, is over $400 per initial 30 day supply. Most doctors do not realize the cost. Not many people can afford that. So what’s the alternative? A less efficient drug, or no treatment?
Coumadin is dirt cheap but requires monitoring. It was the standard before drugs like Eliquis were developed
Yes. But it requires monitoring and has many more side effects.
My mother, who had had two heart valve replacements, was on Coumadin. She couldn't take Eliquis. The stuff eventually went toxic on her and she died.
Oooo, I got this. Family member has been on coumadin/warfarin for 20 years. It requires frequent monitoring, dietary changes are recommended and side effects. Said family member can tell when the levels are off because of the pain and cramping. Another family member was recently put on Eliquis. No side effects of note, no monitoring, but a whopping $504 co-pay with BlueCross BlueShield insurance.
Damned if you do and damned if you don't.
That's what it feels like.
The cost of drugs in U.S. is a national disgrace. Vote BLUE
When I tell my friends in the UK and Europe what we pay for prescriptions, they are utterly gobsmacked.
Yup.
It's a start, long over due.
Now let's hope the Republiclowns don't undermine it somehow.
Don't vote for repulicans, any of them.
Something is better than nothing, however, there are well over 20,000 prescription drugs on the U.S. market so 10 of them is 0.0005 of the prescription drugs sold. Wow. And the reason? We had a list of thousands and but the Big Pharma lobby forced the hand of congress with kickbacks to their campaigns and the kept whittling down the list until we to wound up with just 10. Can we please shut down K Street - and our insidious system of crony capitalism they have created - and take our country back from these nearly invisible corporate oligarchs that are destroying our republic?
Start by voting a straight BLUE ticket and then put pressure on those elected.
While there may be 20,000 drugs sold, the vast majority of prescriptions for about 200 of them. Some of them already have generic versions. So, this is a significant improvement.
Of course, more must be done.
Repubs will say this will "stop innovation", when in fact, THEY wrote into law that Medicare was PREVENTED from negotiating with Drug Companies. How many other things does the government buy where price negotiation is forbidden by law?????
Reuters link below lists the drugs:
No mention of this anywhere on Fox Propaganda’s website. Their followers have no idea this is happening.
Trump is in trouble with his court cases, so Fox is too busy talking about Hunter and wokeism in order to distract their viewers.
They are busy telling people how woke Dems are paying children to change their sex...
If anyone credible adding to the list is reading this, consider adding Xtandi and Xgeva. Both are cancer treatment drugs. Xtandi was approved in 2012 and has no generic. Cost $10K/month. Xgeva was approved in 2010 and has no generic. Cost $10K/3 months.
Without my insurance, I am not sure what I would do to pay for these treatments. Are we supposed to die if we don't have the money or insurance?
The Republican way to reduce both Social Security and Medicare?
Have people die as soon as possible.
I suspect your insurance company's negotiated rate is only fraction of that price, the same as they do for hospital bills. In 2008 I had a brain tumor removed and spent a week in the ICU. The hospital "bill" was over $250,000. Thankfully I had very good insurance and paid less than $500. My insurance company paid their negotiated rate of....$5,000. If I didn't have insurance, I would've gone bankrupt and lost my house. This is why the U.S. needs a single-payer system. The bigger the group, the more bargaining power it has.
As long as there is profit in healthcare.
Your health is irrelevant.
America is broken but nothing in America is as broken as healthcare. Blame the government, blame insurance companies, blame the healthcare industry. What you pay for healthcare services or pharmaceuticals truly makes no sense and does not seem to follow basic supply and demand pricing. It's something else and I'm sure it's about big money.
Blame greed.
Supply and demand only works when the demanding person has a choice.
Three-month supply of Eliquis:
US: $1650
Canada: $450
Same product, same drug company.
No other first-world country allows its citizenry to be ripped off in the same predatory way that the Republicans make sure that the U.S. citizenry is ripped off.
Reminder: if you are not old enough for Medicare, you'll still be paying the price that no other country will allow.
This is absolutely true.
It seems to me the U.S. effectively subsidizes pharma costs for the rest of the world. Pharma companies have to make a profit. They don't exist for sheer altruism. If they didn't make a profit, investors would go elsewhere. And if they're not making money on Eliquis in Canada, they need to make it somewhere else. Maybe I'm wrong of course, but it sure looks that way from where I'm sitting.
The current cost in England is £9.65 pre prescription item though you may be eligible for free prescriptions depending on your age or circumstances. If you live in Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland you do not have to pay for your prescriptions. We look on aghast at the system as it stands in America.
You can get free NHS prescriptions in England if, at the time the prescription is dispensed, you:
are 60 or over
are under 16
are 16 to 18 and in full-time education
are pregnant or have had a baby in the previous 12 months and have a valid maternity exemption certificate (MatEx)
have a specified medical condition and have a valid medical exemption certificate (MedEx)
have a continuing physical disability that prevents you going out without help from another person and have a valid medical exemption certificate (MedEx)
hold a valid war pension exemption certificate and the prescription is for your accepted disability
are an NHS inpatient


Ramaswamy said that climate change is a hoax and that he wants to give a hire of Ukraine to Putin. He will never be president
Haley is intelligent and also a woman. When it comes to Republican politics, she hasn't a snowball's chance. She may get the middle ground GOP vote, but none from the QAnon majority
Other than Trump, DeSantis is the only candidate who can actually run on his record. And that includes Joe.
Yawn.
The Republican plank: vote for Trump. Climate change is a hoax. The federal government is weaponized against Republicans, don't talk about abortion because it is unpopular to do so (Haley is capable of being slimy as much as the others), all non-starters. They should just rebrand and call themselves fascists.
All hat. No cattle.
They’re all losers.
The entire spectacle was a waste of air time. It’s pretty bad when Nikki Haley is the most reasonable person in the room. Chris Christie isn’t doing himself any favors - he’s certainly not wrong about trump. But he will never get through to the cultists.
Since this has become nothing but performative art, can the next debate feature swim suit competition?
I don’t know who’s poll numbers those are but there’s no way that DeSantis won that debate….and Swammy was obnoxious while Nicki Haley came across as a reasonable person. Nobody came across as presidential.
If any of these freaks make it to the general election they will lose. I've never seen another group so off kilter from either a political perspective, in their lack of moral character or from the outrageous garbage that they take as political gospel.
This is absolutely pointless. I hope Nikki gets out of this travesty. She now knows she can develop mass appeal and is simply better than the others. Maybe the country will survive Trump 2 and she can take a shot in 2028:. But raising her hand was a profound moral effor.
Even Christie raised his hand. Pathetic.
Raising her hand was nothing short of a disqualification for her to be President.
Nimrata is always calculating her odds and goes whichever way the wind blows.
His name pretty much says it all Ramaswarmy
Ramasmarmy
Pretty much every Republican has made it clear that they intend to abolish women's private choices about reproduction. I don't have a reason to support any of them.
A perceptive and well written analysis . . . thanks.
The only winner in that debate was Donald Trump. The only thing the 8 of them did was to prove themselves equally unworthy to lead this country.
True. And yet Trump is still a loser. The biggest loser.
Well, then … I look forward to seeing Joe try to debate him.
I would certainly love to watch Joe Biden mop the floor with Donald Trump once again.
But since Donald Trump didn’t feel it was worthy to show up and debate, Joe Biden should do the same.
Drama-Slimy is so (intellectually-stunted) high school. He’s proof that an Ivy League credential (compliments of Affirmative Action and funding from a George Soros Fellowship) is not a guarantee of a good education. At the very least, he’s an educated derelict and an Anti-Intellectual scam. Typical of a MAGA circular grift, his “entrepreneurial accomplishments” (or a-CON-plishments) were all “made” by cheating and manipulation. He’s iterating this juvenile malfeasance on the national level. Touché.
The problem that Haley has is that as she sells herself to the Trump faction of the Republican Party she will tick off the rest of America, especially women who may have considered supporting her. On the other hand she doesn't sell herself to the Yrumpers she will not win the nomination, assuming that Trump self implodes before the convention.
Ramaswamy says he wants Elon Musk as an advisor should he become president, saying, "He laid off 75% of the employees at Twitter, and then the effectiveness actually went up."
What an idiot. He IS the next Trump.
The next loser.
Yeah … and he (Vivek) is not wrong.
Twitteris so bad off, they’ve already put an X on their own tombstone.
Haley would be a formidable opponent to Biden in a general election but she won’t win the nomination —this time. However, I worry about Haley and Cheney in 2028.
If Trump takes 2024 there is no 2028. I do think Biden Harris 2024 wins despite real concerns. The country will prevail but perhaps only by a thin margin. Then we have to survive until 2028 to see what happens. If the Trumpers want to have fighting in the streets, then the Fed will have no choice but to give it to them. We’ll see.
It will be interesting to see what happens to the Republicans once Trump shuffles off this mortal coil. Do his voters vote for anybody else? And will they move en masse?
As for Democrats, plenty waiting in the wings if they want to toss their hat in the ring in 2028 -- Granholm, Klobuchar, Katie Porter, Mayor Pete, Hakim Jeffries just to name a few.
Cheney is a dreadfully awful candidate.
She’ll never be on a Republican ticket.
Face it,this was a clown show where each clown had a slightly different agenda. Scott & VR are running for VP. Haley is positioning herself for 2028. Hutchinson and Burgum are trying to appeal to a GOP that died in 2015. Pence is clueless: neither the pro-Trump nor anti-Trump wings of the party want an obsequious toady who thought for himself exactly once in 4 years. Desantis made the mistake of running to the right of Trump: mistaking the Trump worship for actual hard conservative outlook. Christie wants another shot at Trump, and may also surmise that a major republican defeat in 2024 might open a few doors for him.
Only Desantis and Pence are foolish enough to expect to prevail over the whining Orange Dotard. Of the collected also-rans, only Haley looks like she'll have any political life in 2028.
Thanks (seriously) for breaking it down for we readers whom wouldn’t dare watch it!
Thank you. I lasted only 43 min, but in that short time I agree with everything you say. Looking ahead to Haley in '28—wonder who the Dems will put forward (don't think it'll be Harris).
• I don't get to vote in the closed Republican Primary (left it long ago, now), but can vote in Democratic Primary.
• Wouldn't be surprised if orange man were convicted, he would be taken off the California ballot.
Pence actually is a hologram.
Interesting that Republican voters prefer the 3 most despicable candidates by far - Trump, DeSantis, and Ramaswamy.
For those of us that were lifelong Republicans, please just start referring to Donald's cult as the Maga Party till the old John McCain party starts speaking out before it's to late. In the meantime I'll just keep voting Democratic as I have since I gave Barack Obama my vote.
From my perspective this was not a well-conducted discourse or a debate, but a randomly choreographed farce by the moderators, who were ignored by the participants. No cohesive discussion of policies emerged for magats in the audience to follow through.
No one won, which implies that the alleged criminal indicted for 91 felonies in numerous courts and who was not present at the scene did not lose any ground!
This event was a favor to Biden, who needs it to win in 2024 - the chief magat would be the weakest opponent for him in 2024, weakened further by his legal troubles.
Vote blue.
DeSantis emerges as the front runner clinging to a 6 week abortion ban regardless of women's and doctor proof it is killing women , he takes credit for refusing to allow AP tests which forces students to seek colleges else where. As he proclaims the answer ot the S. Border
Is to shoot and kill. Does he think he can win no votes from Blue states??
He won't make it to NH. He's spending huge amounts too early, and getting the same kind of return on the investment that Jeb Bush did.
No, but as a Floridian I've watched how he gerrymandered our map to go his way. Ugly little troll...
by not knowing that :
- the FED, not the POTUS sets interest rates,
- we have one of the world's lowest inflation rates and it's on the decline,
- we are an energy EXPORTER, not an energy importer,
- oil prices are a GLOBAL, not domestic phenomenon,
- illegal border crossings are in decline,
- 70% of americans are NOT in favor of strict abortion bans, rather than the OPPOSITE, as stated by pence.
- unemployment is near record lows and there are over 2 MILLION job openings.
- bullets are the biggest cause of childhood deaths.
they all disqualified themselves.
Excellent list!
Pence is a posturing, pious fool.
Boblesch, please run for Public office
A good list but the average Americans only see high interests rates, high food prices, and gas prices that go up more than down. This is what the average voters remember. This race will be won on scare tactic campaign advertising. May the best ad man or woman win. Abortion on one side. The other side is just all about one thing. Trump.
i would have ranked haley - 1, pence - 2, christie - 3.
That's because you're looking at from the view of a sane person and not a likely GOP primary voter.
DeSantis is 45 stripped of any personality. Since being governor he’s done his best to grab headlines for limiting voting rights, gutting libraries, and narrowing school curriculum.
What a pathetic human being,
You lost me with the term "human." But pathetic certainly works.
and yet the people i've spoken with thought haley was the clear winner,
while desantis and ramaswamy came across as both egotistical and unknowledgeable on both domestic and global issues.
Remember what the Italians did to Benito? (Don’t give me nor the American populace any uh,—ideas) “Hear that, “Conny?”
Great article
Ramaswamy aggressively went after Mike Pence. I believe this was a good tactic by him and his campaign. As a result his pro- Trumpian lean could not have been better shown. Going after the prior VP and contrasting your views directly with him basically demonstrated that Ramaswamy is in pursuit of that position on the Republican ticket. If his goal was to impress an audience of one ( which I believe it was) he completely succeeded and as a result won the debate.
He's so plainly running for VP that it should be embarrassing.
I wish he would just run for a train out of this country for good. To call him obnoxious is a gross understatement.
I don't know who won. But I know the six who lost (at least in my mind) - the six raising their hands saying they would support trump if nominated even if he were convicted by a jury. They are clearly not eligible for the job themselves.
Or they don't expect to win the nomination in 2024. Some are using this race as practice for next time.
The Republican Party has a history of not nominating women or People of color. Ask Ted Cruz about how the Republicans had Mark Halporin ask their half Cuban Republican front runner in 2016 about what Cuban food and Cuban music he liked. The rather heavy handed smack down of the non white guy who was a Harvard Law School graduate, former Texas AG, U. S. Senator, but he wasn’t white. Thank goodness. One could only imagine what a smart person could have done in Trump’s place. Trump was only good at criminal activity. So Vivek, Nikki and Tim. Y’all might hang in there, but you are going nowhere. DeSantis is the epitome of a “ dumb politician”… So Christie, Pence or that guy on the end?
Mark Twain: "Easier to fool people than to convince them that they were fooled"
The Media wants a horse race...these "candidates" are the south end of that north bound horse.
Truth: President Joe Biden won the GQP debate.
But Haley raised her hand (supporting an "if convicted" candidate).
29 + 26 = 55 = the % of republican primary voters too gullible to vote (likely under estimated).
The show was broadcast on a "Cable TV" station of Fox, so it wasn't accessible to the large national population of "Cord Cutters". The RumbleTV co-broadcast of the show ostensibly intended to allow access to the Cord Cutter Crowd was so intentionally enshitified - a surely intentional unsync of about 10 seconds between the visual and audio tracks - it made the show practically unwatchable. What's the latest proportion between these two mutually exclusive media consumption groups? In 2023 the large "Cable TV" media congromerates can still get away with cutting off the CordCutters from such real time news coverage? The RNC and the DNC ought to get it together and refuse these old school media congromerates this continuing monopoly on real time news reporting.
Haley’s debate performance says a great deal about the current Republican Party. Imagine gaining attention only because you were the only candidate who was fact-based.
And that was only some of the time.
More than most of them, though.
I thought the insider take was that Haley won. However the main effect of this is she will get funding from the anti Trump establishment. Up to now that has been going to DeSantis and Scott. From the point of view of the base the dial has not shifted. Scott is dead in the water and DeSantis is fading. The non Trump candidates are hoping Trump has some health issue which takes him out. Short of that they are stuffed
Ramaswamy's path is through the Trump vote, but only if Trump drops out. But like Trump, Ramaswamy has too little support elsewhere and given his statements on climate change, education funding, and voting age, he will 100% mobilize an increased youth vote against him.
DeSantis is similar to Ramasway vivs-a-vis Trump, and even more unlikelable with his attacks on "Wokeism".
Haley can maybe get more moderates and independents, but loses the Trump vote.
As for Trump, with over 55% already declaring they would never vote for him, his nomination is already a loss waiting to happen.
Conclusion: No GOP nominee can win, because Conservatism has finally reached the point where it has had to become so unhinged, dishonest, and dependent upon numerous small factions (fascists, racists, fundamentalists, corporate interests) that are reviled by the larger remainder of the public that no amount of PR and more lies can save it from elective extinction.
However, if they could eliminate that elective (Voting) part of the equation, then they could maybe retain power that way. And that is why despite January 6th and all the criminal indictements, Conservative donors continue to support Trump and the GOP.
Haley did a great job, stuck to the facts, attacked when needed, and put the Indian Isolationist in his place, all that was missing was her telling him to grow up!
If I was going to vote repub, I'd go with Haley on principal alone.
Now here is the bad news..., she's a woman, and nobody in the GOP will vote for a woman, however they will vote for a Indian guy named Ramaswamy, because he becomes the token minority, that the GOP can say, " Look, we have black friends also"
But here is the thing..., Ramy has already signaled his intentions.
He has no chance in hell of being the GOP Primary candidate, and he know that, but up on that stage he pledged his fealty to Trump, and Trump wants a pit bull yes man that's also an minority as his VP...., see where this is going?
Ramy is just wanting to be VP, and use as a step stone to become POTUS when trump is out or dies.
Plain and simple,
Ramy is an Isolationist.
national policy of avoiding political or economic entanglements with other countries.
Ramaswamy is whatever he believes will appeal to the lowest common repug sensibilities, and by extension, trump. He wants to be a political chameleon. That never works out.
He's campaigning for an audience of one.
Swamy is smarmy.
I think Hailey was right. Elect a female if u want to replace bloviating with achievement.
Haley?? Elect her if you want a President with no spine and an opinion that changes daily depending on the wind direction.
It's really sad that 50 million Americans think their con man actually cares about America, or their own well being.
How do you break the cult?
Like Jim Jones, poison their Kool aid.
Here is my own poll
From this Republican Presidential debate, “No Minds. No Spines”.
I agree that Haley may have benefited most. In the unlikely (but possible) event that TFG dies or is incapacitated during the primary campaign, I think that Haley's strength as a candidate in the general election, and even in a TFG-less primary, has been underestimated. She has mostly managed not to earn MAGA ire (unlike Pence and Christie), and what's left of the GOP "normies" like her. I know two-time TFG voters who plan to vote for her.
I'd like to see a non-fascist, non-MAGA Republican (even one who pretends to be a somewhat MAGA) win the nomination for the sake of democracy in case the GOP nominee wins the general, but I fear that Haley could win the general against Biden by winning over enough independents (with her feminist rhetoric, softer antiabortion stance and foreign policy chops) to make up for the MAGA (and lukewarm-on-Biden left leaning) abstainers, and I want Biden to win.
I think that TFG as nominee would motivate Dems and indies to vote in greater numbers and elect Biden, but I don't want to hope that TFG wins the nomination, because shame on me, and what if Biden is incapacitated and TFG wins the general against Harris? So, I'm doing the RBG dance on eggshells, hoping Biden remains viable and wins. And hoping for a blue tsunami in Congress. VOTE.
And hoping for a blue tsunami in Congress. VOTE.
WE need to get more people registered and then get them activated. The biggest gap between eligible and registered voters in in Gen Z.
One thing that gives me hope is that the GOP has landed on the wrong side of every issue that concerns Gen Z!! Reproductive rights, climate change, gun violence, the culture war attacks on "woke", etc.
The rest of us just need to support getting them registered and energized. There are lots of great grassroots groups focusing on Gen Z voters/future voters:
The Civics Center (www.thecivicscenter.org)
Tomorrow We Vote (www.tomorrowwevote.org)
18 by Vote (www.18byvote.org)
Campus Vote Project https://www.campusvoteproject.org/
Gen Z for Change https://genzforchange.org/
Alliance of Youth Action https://allianceforyouthaction.org/
Next Gen America (https://nextgenamerica.org/)
Voters of Tomorrow (https://votersoftomorrow.org/)
Leaders We Deserve (https://leaderswedeserve.com/)
These groups focus specifically on environmental issues and voting:
League of Conservation Voters (https://www.lcv.org/)
Environmental Voter Project https://www.environmentalvoter.org/
If you are a creaky boomer like me, donate some money to these groups so that the community organizers can widen their reach! Let them provide the enthusiasm (and legwork)!
FUN FACT: Did you know that quite a few states allow young people to pre-register to vote as young as age 16? To see the rules in your state check out this:
https://www.rockthevote.org/how-to-vote/nationwide-voting-info/voter-pre-registration/
In addition, Vote Forward (www.votefwd.org) is currently testing out issue-oriented messaging for their GOTV letters to VA voters this fall. In addition to the regular social and political campaigns, they are testing messages about:
Reproductive rights
Climate change
Gun violence prevention
If you are passionate about one of these topics, please write some letters for these VA campaigns.
"Donald Trump is the clear front-runner ahead of the primaries, but he didn’t participate in the debate."
Not true. Trump zoomed his lies from Tucker Carlson's stage while the GOP told their lies on the debate stage.
The entire mess was a sick joke. None of these pathetic excuses for human beings come anywhere near being qualified for anything but chief dogcatcher, and probably not even that. Ramaswamy is a fake and a phony who doesn't believe any of the BS he spouts and DeFacist is so awkward it's incredibly painful to even watch him and the embarrassing fake forced facial expressions he attempts. Fox Propaganda obviously stacked the audience with pro Trump the traitor people who booed on cue every time they heard anything anti Trump. One thing they all share is cowardice...in spades.
The entire mess was a sick joke. None of these pathetic excuses for human beings come anywhere near being qualified for anything but chief dogcatcher, and probably not even that.
I thought the Lincoln Project's forecast for the debate hit on a lot of the deficiencies in the candidates:
JV https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XJBjqxdutYg
And note the title of this piece. JV for Junior Varsity?
I'm waiting for SOMEONE to look at Ramaswamy and ask this one salient question: You are a vociferous support of Trump. So WHY are you running AGAINST him? I'd love to hear his response, which likely will be fantastically convoluted.
He thinks Trump might have to drop out of the race and Vivek wants to inherit Trump’s support. It’s not a bad play.
Republicans are going to sour on Trump. He’s a Moldy Oldy. Trump’s like a TV show that dragged on for too many seasons. And he NEVER STOPS COMPLAINING. If Trump was, like, your butcher, you’d start going to another shop.
Trump’s voters will break hard for the New Guy, Ramaswany. Of all the candidates on stage Weds, he was the only one who matched, if not exceeded, Trump’s energy and his instincts for chaotic disruption. You say he has no idea what he’s talking about? Since when has that mattered to Republicans? Not since Sarah Palin. Republican voters are only interested in: 1) Being entertained, and 2) Owning the libs (see#1). Plus, he promised to pardon Trump unconditionally.
Fearless prediction: Ramaswamy will win the nomination.
If you possibly thing that the racists known as Republicans nowadays are going to vote for a "President Ramaswamy" you're out of your mind.
Assuming all are Republicans “racist” is a huge miscalculation, that could cost the Dems’ votes. The conservative’s main motivating principle is hatred of classical liberalism, and the world it’s created. A patriarchal autocracy is their goal. They thnk its the best way to insure individual liberty. They’ll accept support from anybody.
Ramaswamy got the loudest, longest cheers Wednesday, at a Republican debate. Who do you think was cheering for him?
You can get excellent odds on that at an off-shore betting site. Try Paddy Power.
Why in the world do Iowa Republicans think being for Putin and being against NATO is being for America? I'm not sure even the disinformation agents who will troll me will know, but someone higher up in the ranks probably does.
Putin runs their country the way they want America run.
I heard a comment from an Iowa Republican about the debate. "We love whoever the Democrats hate". That is the gift of Rupert Murdoch, Vladimir Putin and the Right Wing Plutocracy.
And none of this will mean a darn thing in the contest for the nomination.
Haley would have been smart to moderate on transgenderism, too. That was a harsh note that could turn off potential supporters.
Twenty-nine percent of Republican primary voters who watched Wednesday’s debate said that Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis won
Horse poop!
More like, 29% had made up their minds ahead of time and refused to change their minds despite DeSantis disappearing.
Is it really that big of a surprise?
Anyone who thinks Ron DeSantis would make a good president is just as delusional as those that look at the 4-time indicted UNstable dunce (IOW exact opposite of stable genius) and think "I want 4 more years of THAT!!"
Maybe they liked him because he seemed so angry and yelled a lot. Maybe they just like fascists.
DeSantis won, easily. He doesn’t need to be showy.
He’s running on his proven track record. Enough said.
Yep, teachers leaving in droves, spending millions of tax dollars fighting Disney, the largest employer in the state, banning books, denying the realities of covid, hiring "scientists" who might as well be tarot card readers. Yeah what a record.
Nothing in his record I could support. Teacher bashing? Rights for LGBTQ US citizens attacked? Book banning? Firing public servants from the opposition party? He’s less than worthless. Going after Disney? Disney??? All yours. If that’s what Florida wants, I hope your state disappears under water sooner rather than later.
Wishing a place harm is a pretty awful thing to say.
Won what? Second place in the awkward contest? His "Proven track record" is called fascism and he makes as good a Nazi as Hitler himself.
Invading Mexico? Really? That’s an act of war and quite frankly DeSantis knows it because he was taught, if not in law school, than in Naval Justice School, that we don’t invade other countries, without significant repercussions (and Mexico is our number one trading partner)! DeSantis was playing MAGA-giving raw meat to anyone who wants to dispense of rule of law, whether it’s the law among nations (and guess what, our Constitution states that Treaties are the Supreme law of the Land), or any legal principle that DeSantis doesn’t want to follow. (DeSantis looses in court). Trump went first, the illegal instigator. DeSantis is trying to ride Trump’s boot straps, even while Trump is kicking him! But, Trump is soon to meet Lady Justice face to face and his mug shot is quite revealing—he is not in control, while DeSantis is still scrapping at Lady liberty! It’s not going to bode well with either, because most Americans have wised up to both of them!
slitting throats?
Shooting people stone dead? (Like in the Philippines?)
No permits for guns?
Going after prosecutors you don't agree with?
Dismantling a highly intellectual school and making it a low grade baseball school?
BANNING ABORTION BEFORE A WOMAN KNOWS SHE IS PREGNANT?
Going after Disney?
Banning books?
Changing real history to your fake version of it?
I could go on and on..... THIS MAN SHOULD NEVER BECOME OUR PRESIDENT
This man should be in any elected office
Hahaha! That proven track record of government overreach, book banning, and violations of free speech certainly makes an impression.
I just wonder how many people actually watched this garbage the other night. I sure didn't.... Does anyone know what the ratings were, without His Orange Fraudulency on board?
Only someone who lacks at least two brain cells synapsing would vote for anyone who says that climate change is a hoax and that there were federal law enforcement officers involved in 9-11. Then again, those same MAGAts are not voting for someone’s whose last name they can’t pronounce. Not right, but true all the same.
Then again, those same MAGAts are not voting for someone’s whose last name they can’t pronounce.
Let's get real - the MAGAts wouldn't vote for him, Nikki Haley, or Tim Scott because of the color of their skin.
Racism isn't a bug - it is a feature for the GOP especially the current virulent White Nationalist that is dominant now.
they voted for Herschel Walker.
He was running against a Black Democrat. Plus he garnered over 200K FEWER votes than Brian Kemp did in his race for Governor.
29% for Q-Ron? They must have been watching something else on TV.
Im all for this primary circus it assures no one electable is going to make the general.
It's going to take a lot more of Trump's version of "winning" (know as losing in conventional circles) to convince 30% of the country that they are never going to succeed acting like toddlers.


Our weekly discussion thread can be found here:
https://www.reddit.com/r/Games/comments/jul7k5/weekly_rgames_discussion_what_have_you_been/
Is there a way to get rid of the card popups from the bottom menu on PS5?
My SeriesX has exclusively became a Tetris Connected machine.
There's a bunch of stuff I wanna play.....but I can't stop playing Tetris lol.
Is Demon Soul's replayable? I'm trying to justify spending $70+tax on it or just rent the game for a weekend.
Yes and no. There's the option to go through the game again, doing different builds and weapons and playstyles, invading and co-op'ing with other players.
But the game is always the same. NG+ doesn't give you any new content, just makes things more difficult.
So if you're a "see all the content" type of player, then no it's not very replayable.
Multiplayer invading and co-op gave me most of my longevity when playing souls games.
I think so but it depends on how much you like to try different builds.
You can't respec and there are a fair few different ways to play. There's also a fair bit of easily misable content you might want to discover. World tendency for example isn't well explained and can lock you out of some specific high end weapons, spells and the encounters.
All souls games have New game +..new games +++++++. But your generally just replaying the same content with higher damage numbers and narrower room for error.
Many people adore multiplayer dueling and can do that for a thousand hours. But thats player specific, content wise there isn't that much content.
I finally managed to order a PS5 during the latest Walmart shipment. Says it'll arrive by December 2nd, but we'll see if my order gets cancelled or delayed or something before then.
My 9/27 PS5 preorder from Target still hasn't shipped. I've called Target too many times. I want to explode.
Please dont be rude to the cashiers/managers at your local stores who happen to get some consoles.
I work nights at a Walmart and we have already got complaints from a couple people wanting an xbox. This store opens at 7am now due to covid, but Tuesday is our senior day and opens at 6am for them.
Someone seriously complained about the seniors "skipping ahead in line".
Granny just want to pwn some n00bs
Im just glad I'm at an age where I was able to fully appreciate the console evolution for Playstation and it's contemporaries since the very beginning. Videogames are s huge part of my life and have always welcomed me when I felt lonely so I'm thankful I was born at such a time where I could, and can, get the most of it.
Here's to an exciting future!
So excited for Thursday, Miles Morales is calling my name
I got three games pre-ordered, Spiderman, Demon Souls and Assassin's Creed. Not sure which to play first but think I am doing Spiderman.
Will likely play Astro Bot before anything to check out those DualSense features.
For those of us who weren’t able to preorder for whatever reason, we’re not going to be able to get either console for a while aren’t we?
If you frequently check online retailers and your local stores you will probably have success in finding one, but with the seeming high demand and low initial stock for all the new systems, they probably won't be readily available until early next year.
In an ideal world, this is how ordering a highly in-demand new product would work:
Everybody who wants <PRODUCT> has a full week to sign up and give <MANUFACTURER OR RESELLER> $<PRICE>.
<MANUFACTURER OR RESELLER> takes the list of people who have given them money so far and shuffles it.
They let you know your place in line and approximate worst-case delivery date, and if you don't want to let them hold your money for that long, you can get a refund and walk away.
Thereafter, anybody who wants to can pay $<PRICE> to join the queue.
This is the most scalper-resistant system possible, because it forces them to put down money up front for every order with no guarantee that they'll be first in line.
It saves people the stress of F5ing a busted-ass Walmart/Amazon/Target page only to come away empty handed.
Allowing a full week of signups before determining order is fair to people with all sorts of different schedules, and doesn't reward people with bots who can snipe first-come-first-serve orders the fastest.
Happy First Day of the 9th Generation of Video Games, everyone. It will be interesting to see if there are any major gameplay changes that new technologies make possible.
Bought P5 Royal, even though P5 is "free" in the PS+ collection because everyone keeps saying that it's worth the extra $45. Y'all better be right.
It seems like people who had their Xbox shipped from the Amazon warehouse in Macon, GA aren't getting theirs today. Me and several others have their UPS status stuck in "On Its Way to UPS". It's anecdotal, but here's a couple of threads https://www.reddit.com/r/XboxSeriesX/comments/jrszv6/anyone_else_ordered_from_amazon_and_got/
https://reddit.com/r/XboxSeriesX/comments/jrmpcu/amazon_shipping/gbu47ag/
https://twitter.com/Harper3809/status/1326236437973508100
Serious question - is it worth getting an Xbox Series X just so I can play my old 360 games on a platform that doesn't take half an hour to open a game?
Obviously I'll get games down the line, but there are no Xbox exclusives that interest me at the moment.
If you do decide to get it and only have 360 games, I’d highly recommend checking out game pass. Hundreds of games you can download and play
If you can afford it, then yeah! I'm thinking about getting an S just for old games
Saw it on walmart, added to cart, hit checkout, website gets hung on refresh for a minute, errors out, and then it's sold out and added to "save for later".
Welp, I tried.
It's impossible to buy a PS5 online today unless you're using bots yourself. I'm sorry it's just the reality.
Seeing how the Xbox release is going: Pre-Orders being delayed (Amazon); purchases being cancelled (GameStop); and units being sold out after a couple minutes of being available; I’m just going to be patient and wait till next year.
Same here, except with the PS5. It really doesn’t even seem all that worth it getting a PS5 or Xbox Series X/S rn anyways. There’s no exclusive games, which Spider-Man: Miles Morales was one of the reasons why I wanted to get a PS5, but then they said it was gonna be on PS4 too. But man, getting ANY of those consoles is such a big hassle and these companies have been handling it so badly.
Just gonna wait to get one, when God of War Ragnorak and Gotham Knights come out. Otherwise, PS4 and PC will definitely do for now.
Waited for over an hour in the queue on the Sony site, got it in the cart, then was told shortly after that it was expired and that I had to delete it from my cart before continuing. Now it says out of stock.
I’m heartbroken right now. :(
for real though, demons souls is probably the best looking game i've ever played. and it doesn't even run in 4k. That just makes me think 4k is unnecessary. 1440p with upscaling techniques is far more than good enough, and you can push higher framerates
4K has always felt like a weird priority. It can sometimes offer noticeable benefits on large TVs, but more often that not, better results would come from devoting system resources toward improved lighting, raytracing, and art design. I agree that 1440p is plenty good for almost all circumstances and I wish that’s what the TV manufacturers had been targeting all this time.
whats the point of putting a ps5 into your walmart cart if they just keep getting errors and 10 refreshes later it goes out of stock
I dont understand how bots are able to order shit when the website literally doesnt work
Walmart opened their Xbox online orders at 12:00 pm, the very second it turned over, I added it to my cart, and by the time I got to the end of checkout, they were sold out. A matter of like 15 seconds.
That sounds shady as fuck. How does that even happen?!
My Walmart gave employees dibs before the general public. I waited in line 4 hours. Doors open and all 7 were sold out....
I mean really, gtfoh
This is fucking ridiculous. The literal second it went from 5:59 to 6:00, Walmart seized up and became unresponsive, even though I was already on the page, just refreshing. After a minute or so of errors and "sorry"s, it came back and the PS5s were gone. This shit is why people will pay 2 grand for one of these things.
I got to see a Dualsense in action recently and its really a game changer as far as "standard" controllers go.
When you fire an automatic rifle, the trigger actually pushes your finger back halfway through the trigger press, after each round fired. Its crazy.
Actually fucking shameful. Walmart adds stock to its website, website gets flooded by bots to the point that the website stops loading and is unusable. Stock is soldout.
Such unbelievably shitty behaviors.
Retailers need regulatory oversight to mandate bot protection and scalping of physical goods needs to be illegal.
I'm hoping to snag a PS5 at Target on Thursday but I'm pretty anxious about it. Since they have consoles in store for pickup I think that's my best chance. I'd love to play demon souls before next year!
My PS5 hard froze launching Demon’s Souls for the first time - it froze for a few seconds during the intro movie, desyncing the audio and video and making the controller unresponsive. After the intro movie ended it just stayed at a black screen.
Had to hold in the power button for ~20 seconds, after that it downloaded a patch for DS and I haven’t had it happen since.
I think the system is going to have to do what the PS4 did and suggest you allow patches to finish downloading and installing before launching software.
There’s a guy on Twitter called Wario64 who meticulously posts when the next gen consoles pop up for sale, he’s super quick about it. That was the only way I was able to get a preorder in time. If you’re having trouble finding them try following him.
Well after failing 5 times to get a PS5 time to just wait, I guess this was a good thing. $600 for demon souls is pretty steep. I’ll hold out tell buying isn’t constantly refreshing stock.
It still amazes me how retailers have no nothing to combat bots. PS5 was in stock on amazon. Every time I hit add to cart, it would say it was empty. Reload the page hit add to cart, still empty cart. For 5 mins over and over till it was out of stock. I'm so tired of scalpers on every product that can be resold. I wish there was just some way to stop the botting and let actual people buy what they wanted.
What incentive do retailers have to combat bots? Bots or real, their product stock gets sold out instantly. These retailers are not in the business of making things fair. They're in the business of moving product. And business is booming.
It's kind of surprising how visually underwhelming the opening cinematics are in Demon Souls compared to just how damn beautiful the game itself is.
Will there be an additional launch thread for PS5 releasing in other countries next week?
Got to the store early here in Japan to snag a PS5 only to find out that you can only reserve one to purchase by raffle for the foreseeable future. Fuck. Scalpers are having a field day.
fck you walmart, I got to the last page to place order but then you hit me with 3 captchas that fcked me over
daily fuck you to walmart because you make me play the stupid recaptcha game for 10min, get it in my cart and then the checkout button doesnt work
Walmart sold out within seconds, as well.
Guess I'll try again for PS5s tomorrow/Thursday, but overall extremely disappointed that retailers didn't provide stronger protection against bots.
Why was the issues thread removed?
I think it's because some of the issues were found to be fake
target fucking sucks. I preordered on sept 16th in the first wave, and it still stuck on "preparing to ship"
how has every other retailer done this so much better?
Lol Walmart sold out almost instantly. Tried adding to cart got an error about 5 times then it said "to keep your account safe click the box below" and there was no box.
This is what happens when theres no regulation to protect consumers. None of these retailers have bot protections in place, there's no laws against scalping of physical goods, and the result is websites flooded by bots and scalpers selling those bot-bought consoles for 2k.
personally I like console wars as it creates a competitive market.
I don't like fanboyism.
both consoles seem to be neck and neck in performance. ps5 getting advantage right now due to it's lineup.
anyone know if walmart cancelled the $30 Spiderman orders. mines still says pending.
Is any reason I should get a Series X/S if I already have GamePass on PC? It seems all the big Xbox releases are also going to be on PC, so if I can save some money by skipping out on Xbox and just getting a PS5 this gen that would be great.
There are a ton of games available on game pass console that aren’t available on PC. I bought a cheap xbone one S so I could play all the gears games, Nier and a few others that aren’t on game pass PC. I’m probably going to get a series S later on when they’re in stock to replace my Xbone
That’s what I did. High end pc + ps5 is a good combo
RedditDetector
There's a list here of Gamepass games on PC and those on console.
Console has 349 games while PC has 226. Some that are only on the console Gamepass are on PC like Planet Coaster or the EA games, but are just not on Gamepass for PC. Not all of the PC ones are on XBox either, so there's more console-only ones than the difference in number between the two.
While the big name XBox titles tend to be on both, there are a lot of highly-rated games on the console only Gamepass.
I live in Australia, I preordered the PS5 from EB Games and got the release day shipment but there’s 2 days til release and I’ve not heard anything about my console being shipped off yet. Does anyone have any information about this? Is it still likely that I’ll have it by Thursday or should I just stop holding my breath for that hahahah
You shou
Ordered from bestbuy a PS5 for delivery.
Hoping I get a shipment notification ASAP.
TAKE MY MONEY DAMN IT!
Oh boy the console wars crowd are really flaring up with the launch so close. Someone blocked me because I corrected them in their claim the PS5 can't play games at 4k nor can they reach 60 fps.
This may only help west coasters, but my local Gamestop opened at 10 am and had a few non preorder units in stock (I think 6). Only catch was that people who didn't preorder were forced to get a bundle with the $50 protection
Only catch was that people who didn't preorder were forced to get a bundle with the $50 protection
I like how you're acting like that's just a minor thing and not a complete dealbreaker to most sane people.
Guarantee that was employees trying to increase their attach numbers, wtf is that shit
I thought this was illegal during past launches?
So a $50 tax to buy it first.
Man, some people are crazy/.
Is there a way to actually order one of these damn things? No one has had a "preorder now" option open for months.
Welp. Was refreshing the Target page for local pickup. Came in stock at 12:40am with 3 left. Immediately added to cart, tried to check out. Got stuck at the final step, wouldn't load the next page. Refresh. Item out of stock.
GG WP.
Just happened again, only on Best Buy.
Aaaaand again on Walmart. Had it in my cart, was literally waiting for the "place order" page to load and it booted me out saying they're out of stock. Honestly this is fucking ridiculous. It must be bots, I have no idea how else they could sell their entire stock in under 10 seconds.
We should fully expect the reseller market to continue until you can buy these in stores with ease. StockX has listings for all 4 consoles, PS5 Disc version currently selling at around $850. Dozens and dozens of sales today. It's easy money for these people. Same as sneakers.
What a joke. Walmart.com is horrible. The first time it made me re-enter my credit card info when it was added a week ago. The second and third time my delivery address disappeared and I had to re-enter that. By that time they are all gone. Are they screwing with peoples login info?
As someone who only had a PS4 for about a year after launch but also has a decent gaming PC, PS5 is the obvious choice, right?
With the PS+ collection + other PS4 games I've missed I should be looking at a big library.
yup and if xbox ever delivers a great exclusive. you have game pass pc
Since Persona 5 is apart of the PS+ collection, I am tempted to go back to it and get the platinum trophy since I got the platinum for Royal earlier this year. Gonna miss all of the QoL changes and Sumi from Royal though.
Did anyone manage to get one from Walmart?
I got to the cart, put in my info, had to click submit multiple times due to errors happening, and then it said sold out. Why it didn't reserve a stock for me when I put it in my cart I do not know.
So. I didn't pre-order one in Canada.
I put my name on a "first to know" list at my local EB games like a week ago.
I didn't know that they were doing launch day online only. So after work today I went to my local walmart to see what the scoop was. No consoles, went to EB, no consoles.
I come home kinda sad. Pissed off because I know that Bots likely bought all the consoles.
Sit down at my computer start redditing.
my phone rings. It's EB games.
"Wtf"
I pick up "Congratulations, you're on our first to know list and we're letting you know you can pick up a Playstation 5 console tomorrow"
What the fuck.
People pre-ordered legitimately, and have to wait until next week.
I randomly put my name on a first to know list a week ago and I get my console tomorrow.
Not a gloat post at all, I just can't really believe my luck. I'm speechless.
Got my PS5 today and wow, it is amazing. Coming from Xbox 1 (which wasn’t used much), as a single player gamer I felt like a kid again booting it up and playing Astro. The controller is excellent and the value from PS plus is phenomenal. Happy I went with Sony this Gen
Some people have reported their Series X failling. Doesn't seem to be widespread, but worth keeping an eye on
https://twitter.com/RoninStrife/status/1326200782983716864 https://twitter.com/Kaj1maru/status/1326370207800029184 https://twitter.com/GilicoHdV/status/1326168339765456899
Some of those videos are provably fake, as you can see mentioned in the replies. Stuff like being originally posted in August, or from people who publicly stated they weren't buying the Series X, etc.
Not saying there aren't failures, as is the case with electronics in general, but that these videos are to likely be taken with a grain of salt.
His first comment after it happens is a nonchalant "you wonder why PlayStationn sells more" and his account going back weeks is super toxic. I'm betting fake, maybe someone on the back unplugging the console or something.
Wouldn’t be a console launch without a viral video of someone’s console exploding
nowinstock.net has been a poor choice for PS5 alerts. Half the time I don't hear an alert, and when I do the product is out of stock by that time. Is there an alternative?
As much as I hate still using AA batteries, that Dual Sense runs out of power pretty damn quick.
It's a really cool controller, but it's pretty frustrating
It might be because you were playing Astro Bot that your controller was dying quick because it is constantly using all of the built in features. I felt mine lasted quite a long time while playing Spiderman.
Best chance for a launch console ?still needs 1 😭 sites any stores anything thanks
In the US you'll want to check online with Target, Walmart, and maybe Best Buy or Amazon at midnight.
One tiny thing I'm loving about Quick Resume is that I can sneak in 5-10 minutes of gaming before my carpool arrives because it literally takes 10 seconds.or less to start playing from the console being off.
review of Xbox Series X: Controller is slightly improved grip/dpad, feels good. Console is extremely painless to setup, probably the easiest I’ve ever done. Load times are drastically improved across the board, and fps is much improved on games like Halo 1/2 anniversary graphics for 4k. Went from 30-40ish to a constant 60. Quick resume is dope, easily switch between up to 5 games wherever you’re at in them, and it even carries over through a hard reset. Not many Series X optimized games yet, but the ones that are like Ori 2 look absolutely incredible - 6k supersampled down to 4k 60 fps, stunningly gorgeous.
The auto-HDR on old games is really cool too, along with their 4k AI upscaling, old games look better than ever. I’m planning to play through Psychonauts on it as well as Black/maybe one of the Fables. Overall not a must-buy for any new gen games obviously, since they committed to keep releasing for the old consoles for at least a year - but if you’re looking for improved performance, load times, interested in backwards compatible game upgrades, and want to utilize quick-resume to save time, it does all that very well. If you have a 4k tv but still the original xbox one, it’s absolutely the time to upgrade, and with game pass acquiring ea play this week, combined with the backwards compatibility, provides a deceivingly huge launch lineup of older games. Not disappointed at all in my purchase
Looks like I wont be able to get one until April. That sucks pretty bad.
https://www.gamespot.com/articles/xbox-series-x-s-supply-shortages-expected-to-last-for-months/1100-6484490/
I'd consider being an early adopter of a PS5 but I just think how the games I want are £70. May as well wait 6 months to a year and grab second hand copies for <40 with possibly a couple more exclusive games.
Is there a wired version of the xbox controller? Looking to use it for pc, but my pc does not have Bluetooth.
I believe you can plug in any of the Xbox Series controllers via USB-C. If you’re looking for one that’s only wired, I don’t think MS has made one since the 360 days.
Just plug a USB-C cable into a normal Xbox Series controller.
BT doesn't work for it right now anyway
You can buy a little wireless connector. That's what I use, plugs into USB.
Real talk; all the articles about people's dead Xbox's and shit are the dumbest things I've ever seen in my life. In what world do 100% of a hardware/software product's units work all the time. What a shit post way to try and get bait views. Contact the company, get a refund / send the Xbox in and move on like everyone else. If I wrote to news articles every time I bought a new stick of memory or any sort of PC hardware that just wasn't working; I'd be insta famous.
I feel like you weren't around during the red ring of death.
This is how it started.
So that's it? Walmart was our last hope of getting a PS5?
On the topic of scalping, I wonder if it would be possible for the major "re-seller venues" like Ebay and Amazon and that sort of thing to agree that in the interests of consumers, they would have a moratorium on selling any used major consumer electronics within, say, 1-2 months of its launch. That means no PS5s, no GTX 3800s, etc.
This wouldn't harm legitimate "used product" sellers, since they shouldn't be done with it that quickly anyway, but it would be a strong disincentive against resellers, since product supply chains could likely reach actual customers by then.
Sure, there would always be shady black market places people could find these things, but this should still sweep a lot of potential customers off the table, making scalping much less profitable.
That would require them to be moral companies. Remember, corporations are considered people, but they are not held to such standard.
They get a % of the sale, so a move like this would certainly be pro consumer, but bad for business. People want to part with their money for double the price of retail, ebay gets twice the profit. They become a second reseller in this, and they literally don't have to do anything.
The losers are the actual consumer and don't expect morals when there is money to be made. Sony gets paid, resellers get paid, ebay gets paid. There's no problem in their eyes.
The ps5 has some shitty bugs man. Like right now i can't launch demons souls. like it just won't start. other games no problem. but demons souls doesn't work anymore. had no problems all week until now
If anyone hasn't gotten a chance to preorder may I suggest using NowInStock.net if you want to buy one on launch day. You can sign up for notifications or follow the chat which is usually really helpful.
Congrats to XBox and Playstation gamers! Both consoles are looking pretty sweet. After seeing the XBox Series X quick resume in action, I really, really want one for my living room eventually.
So I’ve been out of the loop for a while...but are there like no new games that aren’t cross gen? No truly next gen only exclusives to show off the new hardware? I swear it feels like the first time this has ever happened, and I’m really saddened to hear it. New consoles used to mean new games.
Demon's Souls is the big one
Miles Morales is excellent, and Astro's Playroom is really cool and shows off how great the Dualsense controller is.
The Demons Souls remake is apparently also great, but granted that's not truly a new game.
Reading all these comments makes me feel really lucky to have been able to preorder before they sold out at my local gamestop. I hope everyone can get one soon this has been a real shit show.
Can someone tell me whether Sackboy gets good in the way that Mario Games get good later on? I already have it and I'm going to play it either way, but I want to avoid going in with the wrong expectations and come away disappointing.
I don't expect it to be as good as Mario 3D World but I'm hoping for some more interesting challenges later on, than what I've seen in videos of the early game.
Anyone know how quick resume works with physical games on Xbox? Can I suspend a game, remove the disc, put it back in later and pick up where I left off?

Saudi officials are killing hundreds of women and children out of view of the rest of the world while they spend billions on sports-washing to try to improve their image.
Fuck me that was grim reading..
That's why i think we should ignore Saudi league alltogether here. Because it is not about football it is about sports washing
A 17-year-old boy said border guards forced him and other survivors to rape two girl survivors after the guards had executed another migrant who refused to rape another survivor.
All described scenes of horror: women, men, and children’s bodies strewn across the mountainous landscape severely injured, already dead and dismembered. “First I was eating with people and then they were dying,” said one person. “There are some people who you cannot identify because their bodies are thrown everywhere. Some people were torn in half.”
jesus fucking christ. this is one of the worst things i have read
They do this shit and then pretend to be some sort of godly nation. Hypocritical pricks
I mean anyone with half an education knows what they’re doing and doesn’t support it the problem is most of the world is ignorant to this stuff and doesn’t care to learn anything
They're not ignorant to it, they just care more about money.
The more we support fan-owned clubs, the better things will be for the future of football. I think the Prem is too balls deep in dirty money at this point.
Eddie Howe: "I haven't really given it too much thought"
And when you ask Newcastle fans, it's just a shrug of the shoulders from them.
Since the Greenwood and Saudi incident, I have lost lot of faith among football fans.
Things I saw on Twitter regarding Greenwood, Saudi Takeover, Qatar United Takeover is absolutely grim. They are not even hiding it anymore.
I saw an edit of Homelander quotes ('You need me' dialogue) painted in positive way for Greenwood which had 5K likes, WHAT THE FUCK? Are we living in dystopia or what?
I am sympathetic to a lot of our fans who say they're tired of the partisan jibes and that they're just supporting our club like they always have, that we're not unique in that respect, and I agree that doing so does not make us as fans complicit in the crimes of the Saudis anymore than Man Utd fans would be answerable for Mason Greenwood or the duplicity of their board, but the collective indifference of a lot of fans has been really depressing to witness.
Like yes we aren't answerable for the Saudi regime but fuck me we could at least do something - protest outside the Saudi Arabia friendlies being held at St. James', a Wor Flags display commemorating some of the victims of the Saudis, anything to register that we don't like our club being the plaything of a brutal petro-state.
Each and every single person who has hand waved away the fact that Saudi Arabia and Qatar are using sports to launder their image should be forced to read this article daily.
This should be posted on all the highlights and transfer rumors for the Saudi league.
It's sad how little people give a shit about Newcastle being Saudi owned. Especially since the Greenwood stuff shows it is possible for the public to gather together and oppose immoral behaviours by a football club.
Hearing people talk about how well they're running the club and that they're doing well without even spending that much yet is actually sickening and just shows how full of shit so many people are with their selective moral outrage.
Especially since the Greenwood stuff shows it is possible for the public to gather together and oppose immoral behaviours by a football club.
I am always astonished how little PL fans trust the power of concentrated and proper outrage. In Germany fans are climbing fences when you raise standing tickets above 20€ or play monday games and that's why these ideas are quickly thrown out the window. And the French are fucking world champs at ANY protest. With Greenwood it showed that something can be made happen when enough people do care, but in most cases it's just a resounding "meh wouldnt change anything anyway" and anyone who's invested in a cause is laughed at.
Meanwhile in Newcastle
Oh no, but women can drive now. Attitudes towards women are "improving" according to the cuntish shills on here as they still kill and multilate and oppress them regularly. Fucking wank stains.
Seriously fuck any of these money grabbing cunts who went and played or managed over there to legitimise this regime. They've actively exposed themselves as terrible human beings for me, and if Henderson ever plays for England again then it's a sackable offence.
I know Newcastle fans will come into a lot of stick for their behaviour - but it isn't their fault that the club they've supported all their life now lies in the hand of a murderous state.
The entire blame rests on the Premier league, and ultimately, the government.
Deals like this should never be sanctioned. Countries with such awful human rights records shouldn't be courted by Western diplomats. And we certainly shouldn't be selling them arms and weapons, like in the UK and I imagine the US too.
People are all over this thread calling out Newcastle fans. They're just working class football fans for the most part who have had their club taken.
The real problem is a government that would allow our game be turned into a plaything of murderous states. They're the only ones with power in this scenario.
Newcastle fans should be more vocal about saudi arabia actions because they need to see that sportwashing doesnt work even to people who support your club.
Greenwood saga gave me confidence that people care more about morals than football so I really hope we will see some protest against saudi before or during Newcastle games.
It's a no-win situation. I haven't given a penny to the club since the takeover, and I don't plan to, but you get people on both sides going at you for either being a "virtue signaller trying to bring Newcastle United down" or a "genocide enabler".
When the takeover went through, I would talk about my unease, but it always just ends up in shit-flinging from all sides, so I just end up keeping my feelings to myself most of the time
I am and get downvoted for being a hypocrite and sent awful DMs from fans of other clubs calling me a murderer for having a Newcastle flair.
Genuinely can’t win as everyone assumes I’m in favour of the takeover from the flair alone.
But but generation wealth..
“They have the right to get the bag! Kings! You would do the same!”
The dumb fucks that spam shit like that on every Saudi post should be tied to a chair and forced to read and see atrocities that those monsters commit.
Gotta secure that wealth so their great-great-great-great-grandson can own a private jet without working a day in his life!!!
Makes you want to hate the sport you love
Support local lower league if you can. Where community still matters.
The likes of Ronaldo and Co that decide to go play out there are pretty despicable. No way they don't know what Saudi is about, yet they decide to go there for all that money. I couldn't give a shit what Ronaldo donates to charity, he's just as bad.
Messi is also a saudi ambassador you hate him too
You know I would agree with you if you didn't only target the Saudis. We gonna criticise Beckham or any other player who goes to the US with their massive amount of war crimes in Iraq and Afghanistan? This energy is always only directed at players going to Saudi.
Absolutely awful. Apart from boycotting SJP, refusing to buy the shiny new Adidas shirt and being vocal about how much I hate the Saudis, what else can I do?
Nothing in the UK by an individual or small group of individuals will impact Saudi policy internally or externally.
Yeah the people shitting on Newcastle fans are virtue signaling cunts. Genuinely think they’re better than you cuz they don’t support Newcastle. As if u had any sort of control in the matter.
The UK Government sells weapons to the Saudi's, the FA and EPL allowed them to buy your club. The media looks the other way to what they're doing.
It's not right that you feel like you're the one letting Newcastle down.
Come on now, what did Sarah Jessica Parker do this time?
One million Iraqis dead and no one in this sub said anything about the morals of Messi's move to the MLS.
Before you downvote me, explain to me why they deserved to die.
The MLS isn't owned by the government that committed such atrocities. Stop with the whataboutism.
I'm pretty sure if someone from Biden's cabinet was spearheading the MLS project, people would lose their heads too.
You're the one who needs to explain why you think the MLS killed one million Iraqis.
Because the US government don’t own Inter Miami.
It’s got absolutely nothing to do with the geographical location of the league, it’s because the people committing war crimes, funding terrorists and torturing journalists are the same people who own Newcastle and a couple of the Saudi teams
It’s not hard to understand
They don't. They fail to forget Saudi Arabia learnt sports washing with their American buddies.
No need to go to Iraq or even to the past.
Any Saudi atrocities in Yemen has USA (and the whole west) hands on it as well.
Why people here pretending that Saudi Arabia is a pariah state that works alone?
There’s also the undercovered aspect that the US military has provided funding, weapons, and training to the Saudi border security. https://open.substack.com/pub/thecolumn/p/biden-administration-funding-and?r=22c6i&utm_medium=ios&utm_campaign=post
The US has better PR
the us gov't doesn't own MLS clubs. MLS is not being used to make the US gov't look good in front of the world.
If you want to use messi as an example, he's taking Saudi money to promote their world cup bid against Argentina/Uruguay's bid.
Just posted a very similar comment. Big ups to you for recognising both sides of the issue. People wanna shout whataboutism don't even know what that means lol.
Btw I'm from India, so lest we forget the crimes of the UK monarchs themselves. If not the pioneers, they definitely perfected the guidebook on pillaging.
Messi being a piece of shit doesn't mean Saudi Arabia isn't a piece of shit. Nobody needs to explain anything to you, you need to be less stupid.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slavery_in_Saudi_Arabia
then explain to me why Saudi Arabia was the center of slave trade? What did the Sudanese and Ethiopians (for example) do to the Arabs to deserve this? Or the Circassian or Georgian or Syrian or Indian women ho had to "work" as sex slaves in the harems.
The United States has killed hundreds of thousands of people. Funny how “sports-washing” is never used in that context…
Because the US government don’t own the sports teams dumbass so it’s got nothing to do with them.
The Saudis that kill innocent people are the same ones paying Ronaldos wages or buying players for Newcastle
They didn't sport-washed their actions. They've democracy-washed them lol.
Saudi arabia is really bad but the united states are even worse.
I see they are not just trying to kill football, fucking gross.
If true, it is absolutley horrendous and should be condemed by every means possible. However, the only real evidence, if anyone bothered to read the article, is eye witness testimony. That being said, I absolutley don’t doubt that terrible things happened in that region. The Saudi-Yameni boarder is a lawless place, and technically still a war-zone. Being a migrant alone makes one in an extermely vulnerable position, now imagine that in a war-zone.
That being said, lets all now witness the backwards logic of the idea of ‘sportswashing’. Bringing a country in the spotlight does not rinse its image, it just highlights its imperfections and flaws.
Now should this sub be turned into a a place where we post about countries’ boarder agencies, foreign policy, and domestic politics? Should we post about migrants drawing in the sea due trying to reach Europe? Should we post about the Spanish Wolfpack rape case? What about Israeli apartheid anytime an Israeli player and team is in the news?
No one is pretending Saudi is perfect, but I don’t see anyone critiquing the tory party everytime the PL is posted here. Or Bolsonaro’s treating of the Amazon when he was president when posting a Flamengo goal. Or the US drone attack that killed 8 Afghani civillians? Or the the video that Julian Assange leaked and made him a target by the US and UK governaments?
This is such a huge false equivalence it’s crazy.
The reason we don’t talk about Israeli players, the tory party, atrocities that happen in Spain, migrants dying trying to enter Europe… Is because the Israeli government don’t own Newcastle. The Tory party don’t own multiple clubs in a league they are buying world famous player to play in purely to sportswash. The owners of Crystal Palace didn’t brutally mutilate and torture a journalist. The Galzers aren’t currently at war with Yemen and killing children daily
The second the state of Israel own a football team in the Prem then we will talk about it Israeli apartheid on r/soccer rather than political subs
And as much as I fucking hate the tories, you’d either be unbelievably stupid or deliberately mislead to even try to say they’re even slightly as bad as the Saudi Royal Family. Last I checked, Sunak didn’t torture someone because they spoke out against him.
bro don’t waste your time.
This is the exact type of racism we should fight against but media tells us racism is a lot more simple than that and is actually more about catching someone slipping and uttering a single word rather than confronting everyone's own little biases
Just a reminder women players successfully revolted against having a “visit saudi” sleeve ad for the world cup. When players stand up united against something they can enact change.
So why is it necessary to type women and children when they are killing everyone?
Invokes a deeper emotional response from the reader.
Sales.
This is what happens when people know there are literally no consequences to their actions. When you can do anything you want to another person and you are risking absolutely nothing. This is what raw humanity is when stripped of its laws, respect or empathy.
It's very sad that there are people having to experience this while the rich continue to get richer by showing support to the people responsible for it.
I see a lot of comments criticising Newcastle fans for just blindly supporting their club and not speaking out, but wtf are the rest of you doing, other than complaining on here?
You see so many rivals fans being vocal about this stuff in these threads but you never take it any further. Why aren’t you protesting? Why aren’t you setting an example? You never see anything at Premier League games.
You’re all talk and just as much to blame for letting it happen as everyone else. It’s almost like you’ll just use it as attack ammo and then just conveniently forget about it and move on with your lives once you leave the thread.
If fans of teams like Arsenal actually gave a shit about this stuff, they’d be protesting their kit and stadium sponsor, but they don’t (at least Bayern did). They just walk around with it proudly on their chest, while criticising others.
look what kind of abuse you get for calling out others for not doing anything either.
You supporters of state-owned sportswashing clubs have to stick together, I see.
No one should be surprised about this. Also don’t forget about their war in Yemen it’s easy to forget about that since it’s been going on for so long
Okay. I don't watch Newcastle games, what is there to do?
Well, I suppose Newcastle fans could have started with not wearing towels on their head and cheering in the streets when they were bought out the the Saudis. Beyond that, protest.
About as much as the rest of us can do.
The Saudi regime is undoubtedly one of the worst on the planet, but they're a key strategic ally of the majority of the world powers, so they'll continue to be supplied with weapons and a blind eye will be turned to each and every action of theirs.
Be vocal.
Europe needs energy (oil and gas) from saudi/ middle east especially after Ukraine-Russia war, breakdown of relationship between Europe/west and Iran, while Venezuela still heavily being sanctions.
the west also needs the Saudis to be on their side especially in these multi polar world. with china increasingly becoming a threat, china-Russia military alliances, more and more countries (especially in Africa) abandoning democracies, leaning more toward Russia and China, Saudis as a strategic western allies have become a lot more important compare to 10,15 years ago. in addition, the west lost the war in Afghanistan, the Taliban victory conquering Afghanistan have further decrease the western influence in that part of the world (middle east, central Asia, south Asia region).
Therefore, the Saudis and middle east countries importance to the west is right now at all time high.
Geopolitics, economy and security are the most important aspect for the western countries. human/ women/ lgbt rights doesnt worth shit and would be thrown into the trash bin.
the west needs middle eastern countries more than ever. so they would entertain and humor Saudis as much as their can. enabling the saudis to "sports-wash" their country is just a small concession to make from the west in term of the bigger picture.
no matter how much you scream, complain. there is nothing you can do to stop it.
Waiting for Messi to hit us with another visit Saudi post…
Messi is an ambassador of Saudi Arabia
Remember one thing : if we're talking about sports washing, Saudi Arabia are rookies in comparison to the USA as they've done it for decades. How did they learn to do it?
I'll be glad to hear someone saying otherwise.
Saudi officials are killing hundreds of people while doing big business with the USA, UK and the EU. You cannot lay the moral guilt of this on football fans.
If you critique this horrible act, DO NOT ALLOW apologist of the Saudi government to bully you out of the argument by them saying “well, you know the west (fill in the blank with a western country and some previous heinous act)
We can be both, people who condemn previous and current crimes
the genocide in yemen is supported by the uk and us btw
Why are they signalling out the women and children? Men are also getting killed. Men also need to be seen as victims.
Just say people next time.
Way too many people will ignore this and then act confused why others don't want the money of the Saudi government changing this sport in their favor. I'm so tired of Europeans indirectly supporting this backwards monarchy and its attempt to shift to tourism in order to survive its long overdue end that would come with the transition to renewable energy. The only thing these monarchs have going for them is that they basically bribe their population into obedience.
Why I want the West to push harder for green energy.
Save the Planet.
Fuck the Saudis
but they're a US-friendly oil-rich country so it's ok right? /s
Unfortunately, the footballing world has laid out the red carpet for Saudi teams to join the UCL. It is going to happen in the coming years. They will be 'invited'. Who will suffer from it? The smaller, European leagues, who will have to make way for the money.
It's a collective disgrace. The players that not only fill their pockets there, but promote the league also. The clubs, that pay no mind to play a super cup in Saudi Arabia and get sponsored from there (i.e the new Spanish Super Cup), and the leagues (visit Saudi) , that allow these investors to use football clubs as their sports-washing machine. Of course, the federations, FIFA and UEFA. Everything for the sake of money.
Football will still be football. Elite, professional football... not so much. Just a way for rich owners to keep on being rich and make sure the money doesn't trickle down to other clubs.
I wish r/soccer keep the same energy about America killing thousands of people worldwide every year. Literally every big powerful country is killing innocent people everywhere including countries of top 5 league.
Disgusting country.
yet again, this is why no one should take this league seriously outside of local supporters. it's not about the clubs or the players. this is what matters.
ban the saudi league from this sub.
But they signed Tonali
Horrific reading.
Same old in the comments where all the blame is on the Newcastle fans, as if we ourselves got the Saudis in and apparently never criticise the regime at all
If only we were as righteous as the Reddit user who would definitely stop supporting their club instantly and not just morally-posture and enjoy the Reddit karma
Using weapons they’ve bought from the US I’m assuming.
Are sports teams the only ones that need to stay away from Saudis? What about countries selling them arms, and allowing Saudis to invest and profit in their countries. These actions directly facilitate/fund human right abuse and violence. Keeping them only from sports teams hardly means anything. Wish papers go hard on govts facilitating all this.
Papers have no spine to criticize the govts. So they go after soft targets like sports teams.
Imagine what's going to happen if climate change forces this kind of migration onto 1/4 of the world's population...
ITT: europeans who are fine with a policy of actively drowning migrants at sea, shocked... just shocked to see migrants mistreated. your crocodile tears are just too much. Same with my fellow Americans. Even Biden has a criminal policy vs migrants.
Sports Washing works, ask a Geordie.
Horrible, but let's be honest: nobody really cares who has the power to do anything about it. China has been doing horrible stuff to the Uighurs for years and, despite something of a hue and cry, nobody really did anything of significance to stop it.
Western hyprocrites will criticize this but then go and kill hundreds of people in Counterstrike...
Thank God that America, Germany, England and rest of the global “elite” dont kill and never didnt kill
and nevermind what they did in Yemen... oh wait, the west was giving them weapons and intel the entire time. Ah well.
Somehow not as bad as abusing one person. Don't get me wrong, both are terrible but one is magnitudes worse.
like the usa china russia europ have been doing and still doing the exact same thing ohhh hypocrisy of the west looove me some of that
Yeah, the USA does the exact same thing..
America killed millions in Iraq, bombed millions in Syria and other countries and continues its terrorism yet I don't see people ignoring MLS or having the same energy towards MLS.
I know 2 wrongs don't make a right but why the hypocrisy?
The rape cases and a lot of the stuff in the article is pretty heinous, but you realize America lied to the public that Saddam had weapons of mass destruction, then spent 20 years destroying Iraq, Afghanistan, and now Syria on a war that cost Americans 8 Trillion dollars, the deaths of military children who fought in these regions, and countless local citizen lives, just to hand it right back to the Taliban and formally declaring a banking blackout and causing a current massive famine. The only people by the way "won" this war was military industrial complex stockholders, and many of the Senators who voted for it are still in office and were exactly supporting "freedom fries". Many of our boomer ass parents all were guilty of being dumb enough to fall for the false information paraded around, then happily supported the government as if nothing happened while signing up their kids for war, who also mostly came back with exactly the mental instabilities you get from invading foreign land and needing to defend yourself from a people who want to murder you.
I really feel like the focus of Saudi sportswashing is wildly misguided considering people in the United States have a lot of fucking work to do to account for and stop it's own massive evils which are orders of magnitude more than whatever the Saudis are doing. Like, I'm not supposed to watch the NFL now because "country bad"? I would basically only be allowed to watch Swiss curling if that were the case.
Very sad to see the club I've supported all my life become a laundering operation for these authoritarian monsters.
Don't worry about it. r/soccer will always be here to explain away the behaviour of the Middle East.
Quick, post another Ronaldo highlight!
I still don't get how their sports washing is supposed to work. For me it seems like that their tyrannical muderous regimes are getting more exposed than if they would have stayed silent.
This horrendous regime is trying to look good on paper with their “modernisation” efforts, opening up for investments in other sectors etc. what’s sad is some unthinking folk believe their “sporting project” (aka sports washing) to be fine and gullibly buy into their propaganda.
Howay the lads though
As you walk around with "Fly Emirates" proudly plastered on your chest.
We all know this. And yet, the backlash of Saudi owning Newcastle is less than the backlash of Mason Greenwood.
Don't get me wrong, fuck Greenwood, but it really shows you how much of a hypocrite the media is.
100% true
Same goes for the U.S.
And in a more general sense, to the entire modern civilization
Rich people from all of our countries, with assistance from all of our governments, are and have been doing dispeakable things in Africa, in other underdeveloped locations, and to their own working class; we rebrand our culture with things like Sports
It's nice for the West to have a mirror to look at. An Arab person being on the other side makes it more complex, but some form of Xenophobia would've had to be in this scenario anyway.
The Saudi scholars who speak on the establishment are given 10 year to life sentences with abuse no one wants to hear. The oil couldn’t have been handed to worse people.
Every single bomb and bullet used by these fuckers have been provided by the west (UK US and DE). Hypocrisy at it highest. Almost 400.000 people died among which 85.000 were children in this war, that has been going on since 2014. No one cares. Protest if you want change don't click on hit pieces.
Anyone with a brain knows what saudi is doing. Fuck them and their shit league.
Russia $ 👎 Saudi $ 👍🏻
Makes sense 🙄
And they are killing those people with weapons provided by NATO. You can cut the middle man and protest there.
Some human beings are the worst things to exist in the universe.
But we already knew that................ 👀
I feel horribly conflicted about all of this. I love the players, I love the fans, I love the city, but we are being used to reform the image of despicable people and I hate it. Makes me feel sick. The club has been tarnished. I still get excited by our successes but a sense of hollowness persists longer than any glory.
I do often feel, however, that we as a fanbase are being asked to make sacrifices by people who have made none themselves. You should be under no illusion, the entire PL is being used, it's not just Newcastle. You may feel aloof and morally superior, but you also have a voice. I see no protests from other fanbases when we come to play and our away section is always full. The difference is that you are not being asked to turn your backs on your clubs. The silence is deafening.
You are right, of course. The premier league has been a playground for bored billionaires and petro states for a while now. Newcastle are just the latest propaganda project on the block.
It's amazing that the club's only choice was between an incompetent, parasitic, owner and a competent, murderous, regime.
soo happy the sport is filled with these sport-washing projects!!/s
yet those players dont give a shit.
What are we, the average football fan supposed to do? Complain? Protest? Nothing happens when money talks.
Don't read the comments under the YouTube video. Jesus fucking christ
And we are funding it all with our dependence on fossil fuels.
And for the Americans in the thread, don’t forget that KSA funded 9/11.
Using NATO countries supplied weapons, yes. Go somewhere else with your hypocrisy while we in Asia are excited about watching a 'super league' with top stars in domestic time zone.
Fun fact: Did you know that El Classico just meant Ronaldo vs Messi for those outside of their respective clubs? That is the power of football stars and the amount of TV money they can bring in - apologies to EPL.
Saudi is a despot regime, but I'm not quite sure how different this is from Italian ships firing on migrants. Reddit seemed to be okay with that type of attack on migrants.
I dunno, it seems to me that Saudi Arabia is a reprehensible government and that the world has been largely violent towards migrants and people escaping war zones and poverty for a better life.
This is why, as far as I'm concerned, I won't spend a minute watching the Saudi League
They’ve been doing for years and the west is happy to continue their business dealings with them, buying their oil and selling them advanced arms and weapons. I find it hypocritical that this only now becomes an outrage and is getting attention because they’re snatching players off European teams, and have become a legitimate treat on the transfer market.
Newcastle fans: oiiiii and Stan Kroenke and the glazers under pay their employees. Exactly the same
"But x (any european country) did atrocities too in the past, so what's the problem? you hypocrites!"
I strongly advise anyone who argues like this to read a book about history. (specifically about slave trade)
Feel like we should ban posts about the Saudi league on this sub.
Mods please I beg, don’t allow them to have any attention
Just a quick reminder for anyone in this thread that they all bought these weapons from the US for over $100 Billion
Dirtbags!!! They’ve been doing this type of shit for a while too…
Sick fucking people. Disgusting
There's a decent portion of the UK that would be happy if we did this with our migrants the demonisation of them in the press is horrific.
Welcome to the Camel League
Newcastle fans still feasting and dress like them. Nothing to see here Amazon documentary is out Saudis are great
Also Eddie Howe says fake news this
But the UK's asylum system is inhumane when we literally give asylum seekers free accommodation and food.
Not just Saudi, most Gulf countries are awful
Have they thought of the generational wealth the players will get though?
Can someone explain why people from Ethiopia want to smuggle into a country that is so brutal?
It’s like Jews trying to smuggle back into Nazi Germany.
Just wondering what they’re hoping to accomplish.
It's amazing how sports can whitewash current situations.
Soccer is irrelevant when it comes to geopolitics.
I've always been dying to know how "sports washing" works and how is it supposed to make me feel about Saudi Arabia? I don't think any more highly of them now than before.
yh but Newcastle got into UCL /s
oh i can just imagine what the majority of comments in this therad are going to be like.
Strange how no one really cared about what was going on in Saudi Arabia until our takeover, but now every fan of every other club has impeccable morals and we're all disgusting for support the team we have done our whole lives
Elsewhere in Africa, everybody should read about the genocide that the Arab supremacist RSF is currently conducting in Sudan. We sent a UN mission to the Darfur region about 25 years ago, but that hasn't stopped the RSF (who descend from the Janjaweed that perpetrated the genocide at the time) from trying again. Yes, the SAF is propping up an undemocratic regime, but the RSF is miles worse.
Why is this relevant? Because the UAE are one of the biggest allies of the RSF. Hemedti (the RSF leader) is close friends with the UAE leadership, personally meeting with Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan as recently as 2022, and the UAE->Chad->Sudan air bridge is one of the reasons why they are able to continue tearing apart Darfur and Sudan as a whole several months into the civil war. But basically nobody I've met knows that the UAE is directly sponsoring this ethnic cleansing like this.
Sports washing doing a great job here then eh?
They are crossing a border in an extremely bloody warzone accompanies by armed Houthi smugglers. I would be surprised if they weren’t killed.
Not supporting this in any facet. Neither do I condone any whataboutery, but I never see any articles posted about the sheer pillaging and raping the so called 1st world countries have done to the "3rd world" countries. Let's acknowledge both of these issues as wrong and bring them both to light. It is not whataboutery - if I am seeking a fair coverage on issues either side of the border.
See: USA supplying weapons to Saudi to feed their war in Yemen. Or see - Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and the countless other regimes they have toppled for their own benefit, meanwhile leaving a mass grave of civilians and multiple countries and their government in disarray.
Why’s Newcastle getting all the shit, what about city?
What if it’s true? And what if it isn’t?
Probably 95% of you watched the world cup. Hop off those high horses.
I didn't.
Wait until you hear about the United States Military
But Ronaldo said...
Land of Allah tho, these are totally religious folks
So how many people have uk killed over the years at Palestine? How many families have they destroyed? How many children they left alone without their families? Stop the hypocrisy and stop believing everything you read online
The world Cant do anything about that, they are US allies.
Literally just murdering migrants.
I’m not a Saudi bot but this has nothing to do with football. You can share the crimes of many different countries.
So everyone in here who’s grandstanding about morals and ethics…
Y’all gonna follow these rules, right?
No interacting with any CR7 content
No interacting with any Saudi League content
Probably shouldn’t support anything FIFA then right?
So def no more watching World Cup
Mmm nah no more EURO
Prolly no more watching CL since loads of oil money
Oof also no Prem then huh
Or did did you arbitrarily draw your self-righteous line in the sand conveniently around all of these things since they aren’t quite as awful?
You can support the club and not the ownership you know?
Oh yes, but don't you see the newcastle fans trying to change the topic or give out whataboutisms?
At least with United, r/reddevils hasn't defended MC at the rate the Newcastle fans are with Saudi.
RemindMe! 1 month
Did the US not murder thousands of civilians in their wars in the middle east? Are we banning the MLS too? People on here have a short memory
Sure did. Those people should go to jail.
How does that make what the Saudis are, supposedly, doing right?
Let me go a set further. All countries have done something shit in their past. Every single one of them. Dose that mean that we can't point out something shit that is happening right now?
The other difference here is that Saudi royal family is the direct, or indirect, owner of these Saudi teams, and the Saudi royal familly is the Saudi government. The US government, on the other hand, is not the direct, or indirect, owner of any MLS teams.
By that logic no country every should be allowed to host a football league
As long as everyone is greenlighting transfers to Saudi Arabia because players are "following the money", tell me, what does a story like this means?
That they are sportswashing should be an open secret since the beginning.
A disgusting place run by the worst people to ever exist
Where are all the Newcastle fans
I mean anyone with half a brain can see why Saudi could never be charged with unlawful war crimes for the situation in this article. Beyond the UK, US, and EU benefitting from this war financially because of arms deals with Saudi, this all lines up with their own foreign policies in regards to relations with Iran. The Houthi SRC government is being fought with because of its strong relations with Iran and the obvious anti-western and anti-imperialist stance of both governmental bodies. Ultimately this is a proxy war between Iran and Saudi where with the help of the SRC the Iranians can establish a satellite state that can key strategic placement in targeting the GCC. The Saudis can very easily argue that they are deterring the migration of potential terrorist threats from the SRC government because they are in active war with them.
I think furthermore what a lot of people don’t understand about this conflict is that the Saudis are supporting the Republic of Yemen, a democratic republic who suffered a military coup in 2014 at the hands of the SRC who took over the capital city of Sanaa. Saudi is not blockading all of Yemen, they are blockading an insurgency group that controls about a fourth of the entire state but most of the populous regions .
Both republics have been reprimanded for their lack of discrimination in regards to civilian casualties. The conflict has resulted in child soldiers and targeted attacks on civilian areas from both sides which has led to both being blacklisted by the UN.
I am not trying to make the death of the 38 Ethiopian migrants seem any less barbaric or wasteful, but I am bringing the context to light which so many people on this sub about football are clearly not aware of in the slightest. Obviously all the security personnel at the border should be harshly punished for their actions and they should obviously know how to be more discerning. But in reality this is no different than the US drone striking civilians in Syria or Israel bombing Palestinians in the eyes of the UN and all global judiciary bodies.
Attention Newcastle fans 🌚 hope you’re enjoying your shiny new transfers
It is very disappointing to know a world where all the Human Right, Feminist stuff only focus on Disney movie but left no eyes open on what really happening in the world.
And still we have people who support City and Newcastle without feeling guilt. Absolutely disgusting
Anyone who signs for a Saudi club is indirectly responsible for this. The Saudi government is a pure form of evil.
Man City fans don't care.
Saudi Arabia has nothing to do with City.
But it’s not Newcastle’s owners murdering people. It’s been categorically denied that it’s ultimately run and funded by MBS yawn
It’s not the fans of NUFC, starved for success that have turned a blind eye on a bloodthirsty evil regime and sported turbans as an ironic gesture yawn
People need to wake up and get the Saudi regime out of not just football, but all Sport (and E-Sports) ..Golf, Football, F1, CSGO, whatever your poison.
Despite Newcastle being Sauidi owned we won't see 1% of the media coverage of the United and greenwood case got. Maybe women's lives matter less if they don't live in the west?
Yeah
With the type of rhetoric in the USA, I wouldn’t be surprised if some politicians looked at this in envy and yearn. Especially with talk about illegal migration and border crossing
They've never had to deal with Mike Ashley though, those Ethiopians have it easy.
Well it worked for Qatar didnt it?
How many of us boycotted the world cup?
Try to improve their image? They're succeeding, that's whats concerning
Not killing people would do wonders for their image, I wonder why they didn't try that first?
Imagine your club was owned by these guys
They need to implement some sort of protection like the NFL does in america. the NFL requires that at least 30% of the team must be owned by one person or a family acting together. This person must also be a largest stakeholder, they are the owner in effect so they can go into league meetings representing the entire organization. SO that eliminates investment groups from being able to take ownership of the team.
an example of this was when there were reports that the Saudi’s PIF was funding the bid submitted by Brian Davis for the Commanders. However, that offer was never taken seriously by the NFL.
Its sad but true. I wonder how players feel when they read about stuff like this in the papers. Like it has to feel like shit waving their flag and reading this cruelty.
Ofc its no different in other countries but here its such an open secret you would have to walk around blindfolded to not see it. And im very sure what we read about the saudis recently is just the tip of the mount everest.
yeah and the united states is funding them but they don’t wanna talk about that
sky is blue


Why GME? || What is DRS? || Low karma apes feed the bot here || Superstonk Discord || GameStop Wallet HELP! Megathread
To ensure your post doesn't get removed, please respond to this comment with how this post relates to GME the stock or Gamestop the company.
Please up- and downvote this comment to help us determine if this post deserves a place on r/Superstonk!
We’ve all been wronged and it’s infuriating. And they’ve done it in the most passive aggressive way imaginable. Please walk up to us, reach in our pocket, take money and see what happens. They stay hiding and cheating.
NO CELL NO FUCKIN SELL
Holding for humanity here!!!
HODLin with you!
amazing write up! it really goes to show that MOASS is necessary to save the country and global inequality. Apes will do better
Thank you! We will change the system
The ΔΡΣtopia that followed the Dystopian nightmare that plagued so many for so long ended after the 741st halt of GMuthafuckinE.
The MOASS is a distant memory now, things are very different.
Noone goes hungry anymoar.
Noone is houseless anymoar.
The ΔΡΣ's gutted the rot.
The ΔΡΣ's installed laws that ensured the greed and corruption never happened again.
Excellent work from PB. Thanks for sharing Welp.
Also, I want to add something that I strongly believe has contributed to the evil widening wealth gap situation we now find ourselves in. Ryan Cohen has made it very well known that his thing is not hurting shorts, nor is it revamping market structure, etc. His thing is addressing the gross overcompensation of CEOs, board members, and other directors…funneling profits to themselves (even when they haven’t invested a dime of their own money) instead of spreading the wealth down to the rest of the organization. This is old school and a threat to the current status quo in corporate America.
For reference, compare the ratio of average CEO pay to average worker pay in 1960 vs today… Hint: ~5\1 vs ~1,250\1 🤯
This hoarding of so much wealth by the people at the top has had devastating consequences to our society, which now finds itself with the biggest wealth gap in the history of mankind. Just one of the reasons I find it so easy to get behind this man…
💯 and I hope this doesn’t offend you but this is why I’m such a Pulte fan as well. I think RC and Pulte have a similar vision of wut should be and are going to make it the way it was wen Ted and William were running their businesses.
You're evolving. 👍👍👍
I wish! This is all PB baby! Hoping they will comment for awards!
The median age to buy a house in 2019 was 47?!
Wow....
Great read!
These stats are flabbergasting and horrific!
We need a planet of the Apes to fix all of this!
In the 23rd year of the 3rd Millenium, 2023 Anno Domini, The Rise of the Planet of the Degenerate ΔΡΣ's began. ΔΡΣ's were everywhere. Some were even your neighbor's high school kid asking to mow your lawn.
Resistance is futile you pretentious, entitled Short. Hedge. Fux.
'JudGMEnt Day' January 741rd, 2023 is nearing.
ΔΡΣGMEMMXXIII
Amazing work, and so scary at the same time. There is just the over-arching feeling that society is moving in the wrong direction, and u / Peruvian_Bull does an amazing job of articulating it.
This all tracks with a book I recently listened to, Trade Wars Are Class Wars:
Klein and Pettis trace the origins of today’s trade wars to decisions made by politicians and business leaders in China, Europe, and the United States over the past thirty years. Across the world, the rich have prospered while workers can no longer afford to buy what they produce, have lost their jobs, or have been forced into higher levels of debt.
I recommend listening if you're interested in this macro/historic perspective on countries and economic class... it's an incredibly detailed and well researched book.
"The Creature from Jekyll Island" should be required reading for senior high school or freshman college. Or at least just how the bank of England spent generations worth family members trying to create a central bank in America they could control. Fucking parasites. Centuries of parasitic families destroying humanity.
If our generation ever wants to get out from under the boomers thumbs and remove the old guard. We need to get off our asses. Realize that both political parties are fucking evil and start forcefully removing the parasites at the top and work our way down. They all need to go. They've already destroyed our future, our kids future. Generations to come will be enslaved by the current system. And with these new government backed digital currencies.... smh.... gonna be dystopian for sure. George Orwell predicted all this shit.
Yep! I posted this as a thread on Twitter that's now blowing up!
Nice work welp
You have completely ignored the fact that men commit self deletion at 3x rate than womem
I will pass this along to PB 🤙
quality DD here
Thank you for this post. There is some great information in here. People don’t understand just how much power the Fed wields over the populace.
A central bank is more dangerous to the people than any standing army.
For anyone who wants to learn more about the Fed; obligatory link to The Money Masters Documentary.
I consider the Money Masters documentary to be particularly relevant to what’s going on with the Fed and the US Dollar right now. It’s a blast from the past, but is packed full of interesting information. And as an added bonus, because of its age, it’s not terribly graphical, so it makes a good podcast if you just want to listen. Watch it... https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bm6oeRgxs0A
The Creature From Jekyll Island (as read by - G. Edward Griffin) https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=lu_VqX6J93k
Frontline’s piece does a very good job of introducing the gravity of the situation regarding the Fed for those who are unaware. https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/documentary/the-power-of-the-fed/
I love the MM! I learned so much from that wen I joined GME fight!
It’s all on you X hodlers…
The X men can save the world again
It ain’t about how many shares ya have it’s all about how hard those Diamond fcukin handz are.
This is amazing work. Thank you.
Feel that? That's called hate. And hate is one of the most powerful forces to keep our hands diamond. We'll diamond hand this to Valhalla and justice being served, or we'll die holding, but cause every day we hold is a day they suffer. Fuck them all.
And it’s only hate if you can truly feel it and how it relates to your own suffering. You can’t fake it.
brothers did you forget your names
did you lose it on the wall playing tic-tac-toe
check the diagonals, apes
The federal reserve is just following orders from higher powers.
I’m who he’s talking about dead ass I gave up on the American dream and lost hope to everything. Now I have a Gmerica dream and it’s beautiful
I like this Ape ☝️
Anyone blessing us with a tldr/elisec in the comments then?
Through the magic of QE (🐒 Quantitative Easing), the Fed has exacerbated the worst houseless, mental health, and population crisis the United States has ever faced. These issues are incredibly complex and hard to remedy- and it may take decades to undo the damage.
This one is honestly worth your time. Splains a lot of wut has happened in this crazy world from a rare individual who can absorb it and regurgitate it in an understandable manner.
This post had 741 upvotes when I clicked on it. I'm not gonna upvote it beyond that.
Damn that’s a sign from the metaverse! Buy GME!
The fed is something man …
It really is. I love how PB explains this stuff.
Solid shit ape. Love reading your writings day in and day out. Appreciate you. 🟣🦍💜
Up you go! ⬆️
Fuck it I’m buying more.
I practice safe DRS wen I do!
FIAT currency has always been double secret usary. They fuck you on the front end, the back end, and every side imaginable. Should be crimes against humanity. Largest slave operation the world has even seen.
Absolutely, the whole system was finally designed to create new slavery which is the Blue and White Collar worker at lower levels and to make the Companies and their Slave driving dragons called Managers Rich.
If you have debts to pay, you cannot afford to lose your job. If you need your job, you cannot ask for a raise and will keep taking abuse from management and work as many hours as they want you to for the same pay.
It’s a never ending vicious circle that was created by the Federal Reserve and the CABAL that runs it.
Great write up. There’s just so so much you can go into with the Fed, this is just scratching the surface. This is the kind of stuff that keeps me up at night.
Me literally up at night unable to sleep bc of how fukd all this is.
This is the age of decadence unfortunately.
!remindme 12 hours
I will be messaging you in 12 hours on 2023-02-10 15:38:56 UTC to remind you of this link
CLICK THIS LINK to send a PM to also be reminded and to reduce spam.
Parent commenter can delete this message to hide from others.
Info	Custom	Your Reminders	Feedback
Right but this is a GME sub you know anything about them guys?
Let’s make loads of babies after Moass.
I'm not leaving until I see people in prison... then the real work begins... and it's going to be soooo sexy
Together! 🦍 🦧 🐒
This is why we DRS
Now listen to this and say it with me!
So, when are we bringing the pitchforks? Or is DRS the new pitchfork?
There will be no CTA on my posts. Meet me on Twitter for some real fun though. 🤙
THANK YOU FOR REPOSTING HERE WELP
Hell yea bud, PB is top notch DD!
Ohh FFS. We just got done with the anti-SEC FUD, now we have anti-FED FUD. Remember kids orgs are made up of people, and they are the ones who can be corrupted. Not orgs.
And as far as JPow is concerned, he is the one raising rates & finally bringing this free money bubble to an end. Forced or by free will that I donot know. But he is a heck of a lot better than his predecessor, Ben Bernanke, who was there during the 2008 bailouts and literally gave away money. At the same time refusing to put any conditions on Banks as to how the bailout was to be spent. And so they all gave themselves huge bonuses & payouts
Powell should have raised rates years ago, and he tried, but cowered when Truump pressured him to back off. He’s as guilty as all the rest of them.
No cell no sell!
Ya gawwwwwwdamn right Peteszahh NFT masta!
I'm going to call it. Don't couple this stuff to gme. Dollar going away and hyperinflation isn't going to happen. Housing is its own bag of wet hair and I hope it crashes soon but even housing isn't trending in the direction of all this economy is falling dollar is worthless crap. Digital currencies and the dollar not being the king international currency is possible but all the other things are a zerohedge wet dream and very difficult to make happen even if they wanted to. They're either morons or geniuses not both. If they're genius why haven't they succeeded already? Do I need to refer you back to gamestopped hearings again for how on the ball they are?
DRS and hedge but this shit isn't hype, provable, fun or good it just comes off as conspiracy theorist prone at best. PB reminds me alot of uw... Probably shouldn't idolize. Fwiw UW I think spotted and shines a flashlight on one thing and did the leg work and literal tech work to make it relevant of a problem everybody knows about but doesn't deal with.
Enjoy the bottom of this post, make sure to hydrate.
Oh! Every day I wake up to all kinds of interesting DD, explained to me like I was an ape! Fabuliscous!
Ikr? It’s the greatest show on earth!
It’s The Greatest Story Ever TODL
Commenting to read later in the itoilet.
The best thinking spot
Wow. Keep in mind, it is not just the US. This is felt all over Europe as well. Except maybe for a few Nordic countries.
How is this GME related?
That last part about social security is proof that it is in fact a Ponzi scheme. You need 6 workers to pay out one retiree? Where did all the money collected previously go? Surprise, the government “borrowed” it. And because of that, current payers into the system are not “saving” for retirement, they are paying for those already retired. Fun fact about social security. When it was created, the life expectancy was a little over 65. It was implemented to be an “in case” you outlived expectations and ran out of money. It was not meant to be a retirement account. It was more of an insurance policy.
END THE FED
end central banking
repeal the Revenue Act of 1913
Trying to survive long enough for end stage capitalism to strangle itself to death on the greed of the worst of humanity.
The only way to save ourselves is to save each other.
Great post! 🦍💜🦍
I wish people like powell and yellen would read this. This is a really honest breakdown of real life economics and the repercussions of rigging the game for the rich.
It should be required reading for any of em before they take power.
Is it only my blood that is boiling after reading this and knowing today will be another day where fraud will go on in the markets and nobody will be handcuffed and forced to close their illegal shorts?
We can no longer afford the super rich. #EatTheRich
1mafia1
This is a sexy read. Incredible work PB and welp007.
I will take credit for the 🐒!
Well, that shit was bleak.
I don't understand how you take 94% of someone else's DD that's emotionally triggering and then add even more triggering content on to it.
But when you think about it, what's the fix to all this?
What's a better system than this passive system, it's the active and ethical, free market system without monopolies
Good read.
I would claim these issues are in every industrial country.
Stagnat wages, ever more increasing housing/asset prices, mental/drug issues and the consequences of these.
I as millenial dont believe, that retirement system in my country will still exist, when i get to retire. So do many other. Yet most people arent wealthy enough to sponsor their retirement by only themself.
Retirement system here is like a ponzi. It works as long there is enough of "new money" coming in, but what happens if there isnt?
Hodling for justice. FUCK THE CROOKS
You can’t blame the FED for all of it. The fuckers running the world (which admittedly the FED is part of) have been systematically poisoning us with GMOs, medications and vaccines with only God knows what in them, and various other chemicals and delivery systems.
The FED is a huge part of the problem, but the WEF and pharmaceutical industry is a better place to dig on some of this stuff. IMO of course.
Excellent post! Thank you for writing all of this.
This is one of those things that we collectively, intuitively, know but often have trouble (at least myself!) putting into coherence. 👈🤠👈❤️
Need help:
Is it possible to crosspost this in other Subreddits? Or will this be seen as a rule break by mods?
Sure other people outside of SuperStonk here on reddit would love to read this.
Lol, finally GME guys are waking up too. Just a few years late, but better now than never!
Now educate yourself further and then you will understand why they tried to divert you from precious metals with their paper silver stunt...
Their house of cards is built on sand and its so fragile that they can't risk people getting aware since there is only so much physical available. Once the physical is gone, their whole rigged game of manipulation is over.
For comparison. Elon Musk alone could break the system because there is so few silver available.
New CPI calculation will shine a better light IMO
They will all be deleted. USA, land of financial criminals.
Weirdest thing, there was a housing bubble crash in the 1830s leading up to America’s only 2 years being debt free.
I think this is a re-run.
and all the central banks attempting to push CBDCs.
This is a great write up. As a social worker I can attest to many family and men shelters being at capacity. I haven’t seen a decrease in birth rate, I have seen a spike in mental health and drug and alcohol. Workers caseloads are becoming increasingly higher each day.
This one is definitely getting archived. Fuck the Fed Reserve!
We also have an obesity epidemic because people are being overworked and have no time to cook healthy food at home. Therefore, they’re going to fast food restaurants and eating unhealthy food more often.
"sewacyde" should be "suicide".
Ah.. Now the GOP "pro birth" movement makes sense. Their ATM's stopped being born so they need people to bail them out.
How I so want to see these assholes burn.
how could you do this to your own people? at least we are trying to do SOMETHING to stop all of them. and to think i just wanted a thousand dollars, total, from this play. then they cranked up the money printer right along with the stock printer. how is a government 'of the people' allowing this? you should build pride in your populace not strip them of it. the only thing left to do we cant talk about here. "you will own nothing and you will be happy". the balls on that lizard, i swear.
Same! I wanted to turn my 3 $320 shares into a $1000 each and buy a bigger 💍
Fast forward 2 years and now I have XXXX, no fiancée around anymoar and am on a world quest to end corruption!
And that’s exactly wut I’m going to do!
I wish every person on the planet receives this message
This is a great post, I've seen other studies that back up a lot of what's being said here, but this is comprehensive. It paints a terrible picture, but I do appreciate your post.
If you think this is bad, wait until after MOASS has made itself known and the dirty deeds of the 1% bare. People may end up leaving the country in waves.
I fkn love you, OP. 🙏🙏🙏
Which one? I’m only responsible for the 🐒! Was actually lookin at postin ur new article next 🤙
Well done, Welp!
You just keep bringing it!
Can't stop. Won't stop!
Why didn't peruvian bull just post this themself? They haven't been banned, have they?
Apes are empowered because of GME & DRS. We see the rigged system and found a way to fight back and self advocate.
Too many people feel stuck without good options.
The Iron Bank…. For our GOT fans out there 😜
Tldr
Can you elaborate on how the Fed owning MBS causes inflation in the housing market? I can see a connection, but I can’t quite connect the dots.
Went to my bank to take money out (slowly transferring to Credit Union) and the teller asked “do you want to take it all out?” Thought it was odd but I think people ARE starting to see what’s going on and panic.
OP I agree with everything you're saying here 100% I've known about all of this for years because I'm a conspiracy theorist and have been visiting conspiracy theory boards for like the past 20 years.
But if you show this information to anyone "normal" and try to connect the dots they will dismiss you as insane.
It's infuriating. When most people reach a point in life where they have a decent job, have a house, have a spouse and kids, have a car and a retirement plan and a future, they wrap themselves in a safe blanket of delusion. They stop looking at all the things wrong with society and try to separate themselves from the bad.
They convince themselves that they are normal, what they have is normal, and anyone else who isn't like them is abnormal and they work hard to build up a wall between them and everything they consider abnormal.
The "American Dream" might have been normal in the past but it's increasingly becoming out of reach and I don't think that today it is even commonplace. I think the majority of our population is suffering and falls short of the dream to at least some extent, and that's not right.
I noticed a similar thread about mass immigration and birth rates today on a game forum (steam off topic) and going into that place you can safely assume some things about the posters: one they live in a house with electricity and internet access, and two they can afford a gaming computer. The vast majority of responses were negative and dismissive in nature. I posted in the thread and was asked if I had taken my meds.
Population decline - and population replacement - is an existential issue for our civiliation. But the "normies" refuse to consider the problem. The issue is abnormal to them, so they need to move it into a different space and build a wall around it.
It's infuriating and what infuriates me even more is that we are heading towards a huge collapse and the "normies" will finally address the problem only when society breaks down to the point where they can't live their "normal" lives anymore. Only then will they acknowledge the problem and talk about how it was unavoidable and no one saw it coming.
I think in order to get clean data we need to separate homeless illegal immigration out of these stats. Individuals in shelters due to the fact that they recently arrived with nothing could be directly tied to increases in immigration. If we're trying to gauge the economic situation based on Americans' wealth, these individuals don't factor in until they get their feet on the ground, get legalized and get jobs and housing, which many will do.
The proper cycle of capitalism is a closed-loop where wealth is not hoarded and keeps cycling through the system.
But now it’s become an oligarchy where most of the money and value is being hoarded by a very small group of people.
But they don’t realize that their wealth only has value because of the 99% below them, and if they don’t have any wealth then the value of the 1%’s assets also falls.
We’re seeing this happen slowly but surely in real time right now as companies keep reporting massive losses in earnings despite all the money that’s being pumped into the system and “how strong the consumer is”.
But in a desperate means to keep the money for themselves, the executives are deciding to fire their workers… who are also their customers and consumers…. meaning they’ll have even less cash to spend on them in the future and they’ll have even more losses…
There’s absolutely no way this system is sustainable, and is bound to crash eventually.
Conjecture about monitary policy is intended to sow distrust in American markets and foment anti-American sentiments.
This is not relevant to $GME.
This is propaganda.
This is why it's important for apes to be strong together. We don't invest together but we sure as hell got each other's backs (I.e. Weekly ape help ape thread) and we gonna have to double that effort when the markets hit the iceberg
This looks at the Fed unfairly.
Can it be done better? Absolutely.
But, the same QE programs you are critiquing we're used, in full force (eg exercising 13(3) of Fed charter), to save America and the whole world global economy during the 2020 recession of the pandemic.
In fact, it took a whole month's worth of QE in a single day, to make a dent into the markets (that's how panic struck investors were).
Now, I'm not saying, I agree with what the Fed does, but out of all the institutions in America, it actually has processes to maintain its credibility, thus integrity, by following highly risk-aware models, as its role of "Lender of Last Resort" requires of it.
Let me ask you this, what would you replace the Fed with?
It handles a ridiculous level of responsibility within a system that childishly hates accountability.
Maybe one day, when web4 becomes web5, web6 we'll have technology to replace central banking and central market making to truly stabilize the economy for all, but we are so far from that.. for now.
Orchestrated collapse. YOU VILL EAT ZE BUGZ!
"For the last few decades, houselessness has been on the rise in virtually every major American city. Drug addiction and mental health issues are of course the driving factors"
You lost me there bro


Thoughts on this data about Arab support for recognition of Israel? It’s from 2022.
saudis mostly against it but if the country does end up recognizing no one will care tbh
Walgeria 🗿
I worked in Algeria and one time and we had some configuration issue on the network and the only place with the same hardware and solution was Israel. We had to ask for a workaround but sending emails to Israel was forbidden so we had to ask colleagues in South Africa to call and get the details
UAE not there cause it’s 100% and they are already best friend allies 💀 smh
In reality it's not, Emiratis oppose the Ibrahimic deal the zionists, but they can't say it in public because jail will be waiting for them. That based on a friend of mine who knows lots of them.
It’s confirmed, Algeria and Libya are more based than Palestine
Mauritania: Am I joke to you?
common algeria W
Y’all better than us
From the Arab Opinion Index 2022 (this particular graph is on page 47)
PhoenicianLebanese
The highest rate of refusal to recognize Israel was among respondents in Algeria and Mauritania at 99% each, followed by those in Libya at 96%, Palestine at 95%, Jordan at 94%, Iraq 92%, and Tunisia at 90%.
It's okay we are still in the game.
I blame Kurds for the 8% regardless if they were surveyed or not 😇
I love my country
Oof, Mauritanians and Algerians and Libyans are mega super based.
not surprised by Morocco tbh 1/9th the country is Moroccan there's a lot of cultural overlap
Egypt still wrong. I have never known an Egyptian who doesn't absolutely hate israel. And it's even more in the younger populations. The poll was probably conducted in tourist places.
Saudis voting for something for the very first time
Based Algeria 🇩🇿🙇‍♂️
Those who "don't know" actually support but they are pussies to announce it.
I can only speak for Saudi youths here (which is most of the population, 70% of us are under the age of 30), I don't think the majority genuinely supports Israel or see them as allies, and while there is a great amount of apathy/hatred for some Palestinians due to perceived ungratefulness, the vast, VAST majority would be against any sort of normalisation.
Remember, even for those who don't really give a shit about Palestinians, Jerusalem is still an issue and no one likes seeing their third holiest site desecrated year over year.
The only reason you may hear about normalisation now is due to tensions with the US, if we didn't normalise during the height of our relationship in the Trump Era, you think we'll normalise now that we're getting comfy with China/easing up with Iran ?
you think we'll normalise now that we're getting comfy with China/easing up with Iran ?
Saudi can never ease up with Iran if iran is nuclear and Saudi isn't.
This is true and what I saw saudis say online
Only 38 :(
Morocco wanting that tit for tat on their very own illegal occupation.
Don't you have your own Maori colonisation disputes to attend to?
I thought a lot more supported Israel tbh, glad to see some brotherhood even though this probably isn’t too accurate, free Palestine 🇵🇸.
What is Israel ? 🤭
There is no Israel.
Say it a couple more times just to make sure you manifest it xD
That country that has 2.7 Muslims and Christians in a camp? And millions of other Muslims and Christians just waiting for their homes to be stolen by illegal invading squatters? That country?
13 kuwaity brothers voted with? Isreal will literally sell you for a pack of cigarettes, prob some expats I doubt this study is even half credible.
Methodology seems solid. You should check it out: https://www.dohainstitute.org/en/Lists/ACRPS-PDFDocumentLibrary/the-2022-arab-opinion-index-in-brief.pdf
the reason why half of the Saudis surveyed choose I don't know is cuz they fear that both a yes or a no could get them in trouble 🤣 which is an extreme level of paranoia. yes the government care what people say and not say but not to this ridiculous level
The 20% of Morocco will certainly get higher after Israeli recognition of morocco's control over the sahara
They already recognised it
To the 5% in Qatar I’m going to find you
It’s a little high for Kuwait.
Saudi arabia didn't suprise me. 57% don't know!
a lot of Moroccan prostitutes out of agadier would love that we already see the Israelis tourist in the hotels
Don't Jordan, Morroco, Egypt and Sudan have full diplomatic relations with Israel anyway?
Not yet for Morocco, the liaison office was just like the one we had before the second intifada of 2000.
What’s up with Sudan? Did someone buy out 18% of their population?
Saudi sitting on the fence. trying not to get snatched by MBS. 😂
If one chart alone could explain why the Middle East is a complete mess. I know feelings are raw and that the implementation of Isreal is highly controversial but for better or worse they are your neighbours for now and forever. Better to focus on building relations or else the region will never emerge from the mire it’s in.
It's good then that they don't get to choose their leaders, eh?
Bro, you guys had the choice to elect your leader and elected Netanyahu → so sometimes not choosing your leader isn’t that bad at all
To be honest I'd rather stand with Israel than with hypocritical backstabbing bandits
Bro shut up we Moroccans hate Israel and you just named Israel 2 times by saying hypocritical backstabbing bandits
Typical Moroccan L.


💀💀💀Thoughts on Marvel's Recognition of Israel?
Wtf is an Arabian knight and this orientalism isn't subtle at all lol
Half the superheroes in existence are just completely based on their shitty pun names. The fact they made “Arabian knight” really isn’t even surprising lol
Look up Dust from the XMen lol
Her nemesis is Journalistman
Arabian Knight is a badass name ngl
This guy should be like Sinbad and Alibaba on steroids
The muslim superhero is a jacked guy with a sword? Badass. Literally me for real.
She looks like toothpaste
Marvel is Western propaganda
Of course, anything depicting western values as positive is western propaganda. Just as every bit of media depitcting Islamic valies as positive is islamic propaganda.
Sabra, lmao.
Marvels earliest and most impactful writers were Jewish so it isn't a surprise that their sympathies lied with Israel and relied on Orientalist stereotypes.
People complain about Marvel going too woke, but in some cases it really is legitimate to change some of these stories.
Sabra isn't always painted as a good person in the comics. There's a panel with hulk where hulk is crying because a Palestinian kid was killed by Sabra during their fight — Arabian Knight is also portrayed as a good guy in the comics
Cómics have always been propaganda. I mean, captain america exists xd. They also made a cringe comic of 9/11 and even DR mf DOOM is crying LOL. Just don't take this shit seriously plus it's old af
There was a comic where she got a Palestinian Boy killed after Hulk tried protecting him, only for Hulk to later verbally attack her and asking her why she would attack those who can’t defend themselves. It ends with “She finally viewed the Palestinian Boy as a Human.” Or something like that.
This is some subtle anti arab racism which is messed up because marvel started as a civil rights metaphor.
Where the hell is Sabra's sister, Shatila, in all of this?
"She's harsh to her enemies but sweet to her friends" huh....I wonder if she's ever attacked the "Arabian Knight".
this makes me like arabian kngiht even more, he is a chad muslim that does not cooperate with is*raeli people and he knows that it is haram to form a relationship with a woman.
They team up later on
Israeli is not even a nationality btw.
They have "jew" IDs
It is a clever way to not even recognize israeli arabs
There is no "Jew ID". The ID doesn't mention if the person is a Jew or anything else. The ID is blue. It's Israeli. If the ID was different, it means they were not Israeli.
Just like in every country, only a citizen of the country can vote. Arab Israelis are Israelis so they can vote in Israel.
You know that 20% of Israel’s population is Arab right
Inspired by this comic, the Zionist scientists created Gal Gadot in a secret lab.
The warrior-hero has to be a female to remind westerners that the Israel's opponents are woman-hating savages.
The fuck is this lol
You're a snowflake if you think this is propaganda, they literally team up at the end
Are you trying to get marvel banned in the Middle East?
I personally started boycotting marvel as soon as the news came out. I would support its banning.
I once read an old American cartoon magazine (for adults) from the 70s (not really a comic), was a funny satiric comedy digest talking about women of the world. The magazine seemed to glorify European women and men and their sexual life. Cringe and misogynistic af. Whilst also talking shit at Chinese and Indian men with ugly depiction of their cartoons. Suddenly the Arab/Muslim part came and I was disgusted how they looked at us at the time. They made it seem Arabs are fat, dark, fat lipped sinister looking devils that lash their women with an ugly cartoon depiction. They even talked how unattractive Middle Eastern women are. I couldn’t read it, but knew the west was just as racist and misogynistic at the time
Is it her nationality — or the fact that Sabra’s a woman that’s bothering you, knight?
Why no both?
I am harsh to my enemies... yet sweet to my friends!
Can you imagine any actor actually saying that line with a straight face? This has the potential to be comedy gold!
Arabian Knight & Israeli female fighter merged into comics; honestly, that's a poor try by Marvel; didn't expect that
IM HARSH TO MY ENEMIES BUT SWEET TO MY FRIENDS! >proceeds to bomb USS Liberty
There's a comic where sabra helped a village fundraise for the immune deficiency foundation, just Google "Sabra village idf" to find out more ❤️
This is why DC is better
This is more funny than offensive. It also makes it so much better that this character is forgotten by Marvel.
They are trying so hard to cope lmao. Absolute cringe
I swear to God man, westerners have the most idiotic view of politics ever.
I love it when you guys don't let your opinion show in the title
Arabian knight is literally me
The comic is very old.
Lol free Palestine
That "Arabian knight" looks like a Turco-Mongol soldier that fights in Timurid army lol..
Marvel and their absolute shit of a franchise can do one. Also I can’t help but think that adults who are into these things have developmental issues. Yes I’m an asshole, but I reserve myself the right to pity people in their 30s who get hyped about superhero films.
Especially since they don’t see the propaganda in it.
Yeah glad their entire company's going south
You can't make any movie in the US featuring the military that isn't propaganda, even nonsuperhero movies. The DoD and CIA basically write and edit any movie scripts in order to allow studios to use American military equipment (and save money).
Bro wtf is this 😭😭😭
I looked everywhere for some fucks to give, but sadly could not find any.
Actually Lol
The jewish superhero can control peoples minds into thinking that what they own actually belongs to the superhero
This comic is very old...80s??? Marvel was started by Jews, DC too. Superman name Kal El is Hebrew. It means Voice of God.
When Arab Muslims invented t entertainment, that is globally interesting. You can tell your story too. Thos should inspire you.
He'll even subSaharan Africans are making chart-topping acrobat songs globally. Your excuse?
Is it her nationality or that she is a women 💀💀
mf look like toothpaste
When is israel mentioned in a post title here hasbara trolls just spawn out of nowhere💀
So many people commenting without reading.
You can tell it's AskMiddleEast from that alone
lol
As an Israeli I do think there is some truth to that- there is a sense of brotherhood imbued into Israeli culture. However, it is my understanding (and correct me if I'm wrong) that Arab culture is like that as well. Also why.tf is Arab knight just a racist caricature
the cringe omg
Stan Lee himself is Jewish
Smash
A lot to say about this mess—but I don’t know that “recognition of Israel” is one of them. She refers to an Israeli people—which there obviously is. One thing that is very interesting is that the spiny pear she is talking about is a symbol of both the Israelis and the Palestinians. I think making the Arabian knight both antisemitic and misogynist (or assumed to be one) is a bigger problem for political representation.
I no longer recognize Marvel
I love Marvel lol
Marvel try to make one good muslim character challenge
And ofcourse the "Arabian knight" had to be misogynistic
Who is Arabian knight lol what’s that
Wow… that’s why dc is better
what were her powers?
Decades old pulp fiction for children probably not the best venue to find a nuanced take on middle east politics.
I think the biggest problem is liberals who think they are entitled to speak on behalf of everyone. Muslims need a muslim voice. Christians need a Christian voice, And on and on.
Someone call Edward Said!! ASAP!
I love how they just put the misogyny umbrella over the whole of the Arabian peninsula like everyone who lives there hates women.
Unsurprising, it’s a multi billion dollar company. They will die out with the colonial entity they support.
Depends if she's a Zionist or not...?
"Jewess"
This is the dumbest shit I've seen in long while
Let alone the obvious propaganda. They go again and plagiarize {اشداء على الكفار رحماء بينهم} like they always do with everything.
She’s gonna be in the MCU 💀
Based
There's a reason people remember neither heroes
Honestly this really racist both ways
Finally
Dont like it coming from an israeli
Arabian Knights, my best guess is holding a sword and wearing the clothes he wears, the sketch is in the 1890s. What Israelis are she speaking of ? Israel established in the 194something 💀.
Fun fact: Marvel actually is older than the state of Israel, established in 1939.
Is this real?
Aside from the looks and the 2 strange characters, why is Ironman depicted as so dumb here? The literal genius of MC
Isn't there a comic with a Palestinian terrorist hero?
killing innocents Israelis?
Asking for a friend.
Bruh
I'm losing braincells looking at this.
Arabian Knight is better than whatever fuck that toothpaste bottle is. Also since I wanted to see if there is a hero from Turkey. I only got Walther Feyzioglu from Earth 1287. Blud is quite decent tho
based cringe
Fuck this bullshit
Is his super power blowing himself up?
So Iron man recognizing Israel is the problem not that the Arab "hero" is being antisemitic?
It''s a drawing
The title's ironic cause I thought it'd be funni
Lol not just that, but also the stupid attempt to tie his opposition to misogyny
Alongside children killer, no
Titanium level cringe. Marvel has officially become the bad guy.
Although in all fairness, it was all made by a couple of Jews, so this shouldn't have been too shocking.
Zionist apologists at Marvel are really going to pretend that the Torah isn't sexist AF...
Arabs need to stop seeking white validation.
They don't like you, and its reflected in their popular media. You want izza; you want honour? Seek it from Islam.
I don't mind the recognition of Israel as much as the harmful representation of Arabs
Short answer it's the nationality
Stan Lee was Jewish solo... Yeah
Need more of this. There’s one with the hulk holding a dead Palestinian child. Please guide me to these collectibles. Even if just online. Ok. Thanks!!!
Truly an array of heroes
I always thought funny that Israelis took as symbol an invasive plant.
Hasbarist rubbish has reached comics. Lol.
Jews practically invented comic books as we know it
You guys are so sensitive, very woke of you to scrutinize everything u see about israel without any clear motivation or context
that’s the joke idiot
Bro it's just a freaking comics... that's the most absurd thing to be furious about. Man I wish these were my problems...😅
Propaganda is dangerous, ESPECIALLY through comics because you don’t even realize you’re consuming it
Nah just thought it'd be funny to post
Israel 🇮🇱
Of course they have to make us seem misogynistic.
Try not to hate on "israel" challenge impossible for this subbredit.
You have the IDF and some Israelis to thank for that...




Hallo all?
Well you'd be waiting a while for one if I rolled it,lmao...I'll ne waiting 🥰
Caught a live... nice coffee power dude
Did you sell your soul?
Sounds a bit like "hot for teacher" play that one dude, love your work..!! 🤘🤘
Best drummer I’ve ever seen
I've literally watch every video I could find of El Est Sib. My favorite
Erin Slover
I love listening to you talk.
Whatever it is you’re smoking dude keep smoking it. You are absolutely amazing. What a talent for such a young fella.
Stay safe and keep the beats coming.
Do you know who Neil Pert is!?
you are the best mate
Chris Porteus
There is Neil Peart then there is El Estepario. Best drummer currently on Earth at the moment.
I love you from here in Tooele Utah
You’re amazing dude.
Got a holter monitor, today, to track heart palpitations. NOTHING, so far. Drum me into afib! Lmao
Hey guys I watched this with headphones on bass boost and omfg my brain thanks me, y'all try it
What is going on
Would love to see you life!
Sounds like the intro to a motley crew song
You're a cool dude 👍
I just love you 😍
Bleed herta bass drum pattern.
Here I thought he was going to play some van halen
Hot drummers roll... Thats the right title!! 🔥😍
What a hero!!
Oh i thought this was a sick cover of "hot for teacher" still dope af though
Sounds just like my sportster!!
Is that really a cigarette?🤣🤣
Sounds like a rotary, V8 engine 😊
You're great, please, play a Sepultura song, territory. 💪
Hey bearded brother we have to stick together.
You’re awesome man!! Truely truely the best. Most talented and the coolest I’ve ever seen. I’m so Glad you’re blowing up dude!!! Freakin awesome!!
If you could play the drum solo from "Love the way you hate me" by Like A Storm it would be dope it's one of my top 3 favorites for sure.
Sounds like harley davidson idle
I thought you were going to play "Hot for teacher "
You make me wish I played drums.
Thought this was hot for teacher..lol
I need a drag.
LoL love the skills !!
Sounds like a Harley
Very humble. Much respect. Been following your content closely. Thanks for scaling your content to accommodate for all your extra audience. Hearing you talk, is good value
You're awesome, I want to see more of the motorcycle changes
Please cover - Hot for Teacher - Van Halen!🙌😎
Hi El, please come to New Zealand 🇳🇿 🙏 🥰
El Estepario Siberiano you are the king of the drum throne! Love the videos and your song selections!
See Mercedes M Cambridge do a one handed cigarette roll in Lightening Strikes Twice!
I wish ppl knew how hard it is to play with a double base with this much control
Love watching these videos. Your skills are amazing
That double pedal sounded like my Harley 😁
It's a Honor Watching!
I wanna hear some Vinny Paul covers
❤️ do a Dethklok song please ❤️❤️❤️❤️
Must try def Leppard- Let's get rock
Love your work bro!
Canabis sativa is good for improving our brain
Would have been better had you broke out into "Hot for Teacher". 😁😘
Sounds like a Harley lol
Bro that's the longest ciggy I've seen you with 😂
Spent on a expensive snare a quality head and at the end you will put any heavy random thing on the snare.
Talent like no other
Thank you for your honesty man it makes me enjoy you even more.
Amazing ! From KellyJ.DeVoe
Wally Harrison
How about a Rush cover?!?!
Sounds like u HADDA V8 🤣❤🤘
I use a rolling machine and tubes. $12 and makes a better smoke. And I use cones for the other smoke .
Did you just steal my Harley😂
Not any drummers I know. EL Este is the only one.
How incredible drummers roll a joint and call it a cigarette.
What is the thing that you use on the snare?
Hot for the teacher, van Halen!!!
Dam I thought he was go into Hot for Teacher..
thought it was about to be hot for teacher
You're awesome! I'll roll one with you 😆
You still live in the same place brother
Van Halen (Hot for teacher)
That’s what I call a drum roll 😁
Teacher
Edibles are kinder, yet you do you brah.
He is unreal
Sounds like the beginning of hot for teacher
It almost sounds like van halen as well
Sounds like my Harley!!!! 😝
Crazy talent!! Awesome skills.
You, are a fantastic crazy, Drummer
That’s not a cigarette
Hot for teacher please🤘🏻
Best in the world by far Neil pert is no longer god on the drums you are and I bow to your greatness
Why is your cigarette idling?
Roll one for Keith Richards while you're at it
I know right
You just made it more awesome!
Hope it's marijuana and not tobacco!
I thought you were smoking the “greenery” lol
Motor Harley 😂
Weed definitely
Cigarette you say🤔
You’re now a “Drum King!”
Sounds like the beginning of too hot for teacher.
Cigarette?
What is the weight on the snare for?
Thought, hot for teacher at first


Is it possible to fail several times and succeed once?
Mark Zuckerberg, owner of Facebook, invited five people 18 years ago to his Harvard room.
Reason? Talk to them about a business opportunity. Only two came to the meeting, listened and helped their project.
Today both are billionaires: Dustin Moskovitz with more than 17.8 billion dollars and Eduardo Saverin with more than 20 billion dollars.
When a friend comes to talk about a business opportunity, always have an open mind!

This is like talking to a lottery winner and concluding the lottery is a good way to get rich.
Most new business investors lose their money.
Someone like Zuckerberg is an exception not the norm.
Profile photo for Pretty Girl
Let’s not forget he stole the idea from the “twins” who stole the idea from MySpace. This is a total Bill Gates theft that was performed on Steve Jobs.
Steve Jobs stole throm others, like mouse interface on Mac. There is no good guys in this business only thief's and liars. And those who come on top are best liars and thieves, simple as that :)
You're right. But the common success in starting a business is to dare…It s not easy to dare.
Daring and bravery don’t guarantee ANYTHING in life. We would like to think it does, but at the end of the day, no matter how hard you want to sell a product, if nobody wants to buy it, you don't have a successful business
No. The success like facebook is just an anamoly and not a norm. 99.99% of time you would end up wasting your money on some stupid business idea.
but at least you've tried something, it better than being a regrettable spectator or aimless consumer.
At least I've tried something?!? 😅🤣😂 I’ve been offered business startup opportunities for an internet, video game, media, comic book, education companies all my life. And when I was young, I was dumb enough to be involved and do a lot of work for these so-called companies, only to have them flop and not get paid! The worst one was a startup education software company making software for special needs children. I spent a LOT of time doing the base code and art design for the the software. I gave them the demo to look over… And they took it and run! And I was paid nothing! 😡 These startups were a complete waste of my time. I've finally learned my lesson and ignore those dumb offers. I don't don't look back at those so-called opportunities and think, “at least I tried something”. I look back at them and think about what a young fool I was and how much of my time I had wasted.
You can say that for the NFL, NBA, TV Shows, Movies, Books, stocks, (most companies go bankrupt in 5 years - so why try opening a restaurant?) Knowing the odds, should make you more fearless, determined, to do your homework, know your competition, and outwork them and out think them. Elon Musk compa…
Seriously, you are giving Elon's example?
No, 99/100 these “opportunities" are really shite and you should not waste your time.
Wow you guys are super-negative. The average business opportunity may not make you a billionaire but it could still be profitable. What’s the harm in listening? Even if you decide that the opportunity is not for you, you may learn something.
But the returns on that 100th opportunity is much bigger. I mean thats how angel investing also works. 9/10 times money gets written off. But one scrub daddy earns you runway to do this shit for 10000 times.
You’re not going to get invited to 100 business opportunities though are you? So it’s a waste of time if you only have a 1 in 100 chance of them being good propositions.
Useless red circle
I don't like Mark but I have to admit that those are my favorite flip flops I have ever owned…the addidas with the ‘nubs’ on the bottoms are the best
Nah bro, they hurt when you break them in. I had to give them to my Dad after a week
I got the same adidas flips
Jack Trotter
“When a friend comes to talk about a business opportunity, always have an open mind!”
except when it’s selling crack and pimping hoes on the street
Russell Smith
Great margins, though substantial regulatory risk 🤷🏻‍♂️
Peter Sancroix
Open legs for the pimping open mind not really the option
Aldina Fazou
U are right. I wish I would meet Zuckerberger for some advice on the right way to be successful in a business.
To add to that, some people have the idear but luck capital, but some have the capital but lucks idea. Therefore they both need assistance.
Immanuel Okokon
Unless it's all happening via an app called “course correct”
Anthony Parry
I have a great business idea, it involves the Titanic and wealthy tourists… not many ideas actually work out well unfortunately.
Bailey G.
Make sure you use an xBox controller for steering instead of a Logitech…that was their first mistake.
Lyndon Sniper
If you do so safely and don’t cut corners in safety you can actually do it. Though you’ll probably have to charge like $2 million per passanger AND be allowed to only take like two people at a time. Many people don’t realize that to build a submersable takes MILLIONS because of the materials you nee…
Submerseble and passanger is crazy though 😂😂 cant trust someone who types this out either mate
Perhaps they don't. And perhaps the only spoiled children
But surely their millionaire father did hard work. Always more heavy to become first generation than the last
Tunnel Man
Of course… someone had to succeed to begin with. Some of it will be old money but much of the wealth around the world is borne of hard work or strong skillets (or both usually).
Mayuresh Fulambrikar
Why does everyonehave a problem with nepotism?
It is an empire that someone created. Whether to burn it, leave it to their descendants or to someone else is the decision of that oerson. Who are we to judge?
Ian
If nepotism was just a case of parent passing the company to a son/daughter/or other family member to do with as they will, that would be their problem. But it’s not. Often it’s government officials and civil servants giving jobs and positions to unqualified family members in order to secure their own position (to ensure the board votes the way they want, or to ensure their own embezzlement isn’t discovered/ made public). It’s this kind of nepotism that most people have a problem with. However, I for one am also pretty peeved with the “self-made” million/billionaires spouting on about how they became successful without truly acknowledging the massive step-up they got from starting with all the money, networking, education etc handed to them on a plate.
C. B
If you got friends at Harvard. Sure. Listen.
Very true words. As a young man, I was also approached by a friend, my age. A woman I used to have fun with. We were both non-paid extras in a professional musical. After five-six months on the stage, including a tour, the play was to come to an end. She asked me and another guy if we would like to…
Sheldon J. Plankton
my friend talk about bussines at 2019 im come and listen for 2 hours ,nothing happen now
Patricia Levi’s
Wow There are really good articles and interesting posts on your page. I checked your posts and you always posted good writing. Can you follow me back on Quora So i can always get notified in any of your posts and comments Thanks.
Síerra
okay and he stole the whole idea of Facebook did he not? Down to every last detail
Jeremy Losek
Lets not forget Zuckerberg’s “innate business sense” to be born to well off family. He was able to go to Harvard and his father was able to give him a $100,000 loan to start his business. In reality, if Zuckerberg’s family could only afford to send him to the local community college we’d all still be…
Richard Amoako
So how come MySpace that was owned by a billionaire didn't survive if money was that important?
BATMAN
Love the way how people shit on billionaires!
Jim Douglas
I think I'd be able to put up with that if I was a billionaire. It would be hard but I think I'd manage..
Bailey G.
Well I don’t think they’re browsing Quora and getting their feelings hurt over it.
So boys & girls,the Life Lesson that you need to learn from this is precisely this: Try to steal a really good idea from a couple of smart people without them knowing what you’ve done until you have time to launch it successfully as a marketable product that is as profitable as the creators had imagi…
Tia
Never use these billionaires as examples. No one will become like them. You will be very disappointed and don’t be hard on yourself when your idea will never match up. Focus on being more at peace in life.
Ak
wtf failures you talkin' 'bout.he got rich by stealing Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss's idea.
Lance LeVier
He heard their idea and realized they didn’t have the vision of a worldwide social platform..they just wanted to do a local Harvard thing. Then they ( the Winklevoss’s got millions and millions in cash and stock ) It’s not like the Winklevoss’s came up with the idea for a social network…social netwo…
Klmj
Great! last year a friend asked me if i wanted to join him in his new taco joint, which seeks to revolutionize the way we eat tacos. Ill call him again, just in case
Steve Swann
I know someone who invited people dozens of times to talk about business opportunities, but nobody had much luck, just frustrated efforts and a waste of time. But that was Amway.
JulFazzlee
have to make sure they're from Harvard or one of the top unis
Leoben DsFrendz
No…there are thousands of $billionaires from India, china, russia, europe, middle east, asia, etc and theyare have involvement in oir technology.
Padraig Cuinn
he stole facebook so yes he is a loser
Joonu Thomas
Apropos the last line - “When a friend comes to talk about a business opportunity, always have an open mind!”
Unfortunately, a lot of “business opportunities” that “friends” talk about are MLMs and Ponzi schemes! Perhaps only 1 in a 100 million is a Mark Zuckerberg talking about Facebook.
Fokwa Divine
😂😂😂😂😂 I was about to say that
Finna Sprang
How wealthy did the other three Harvard bratts become? In the real working man's world, friends may reach out if they're struggling. Some may network or barter a bit. But friends and business really ain't a good plan. Work is survival for us little people. And I am done giving. The harder you work,…
Joseph T.
Fail several times until you rip off someone else's 💡 idea. Sure as if he was a genius. A loser,predator in the wings. Yet he's praised?
Muti Ur
Businesses opportunity of stealing university idea…
you can't force ppl, some have their own business, values and goals. it is fine to be different and live the way you want without being millionaire, it is also great if you are being one, why do you want to be a millionaire if you are not happy, they are happy then it's good.
Sounds like an overused anecdote for prospecting people into a ponzi scheme
Claudette Perkins
Yes, My Thoughts I have been homeless and went through Domestic Violence, But have 13 yrs.College, and 2 Degrees, And I am A Senior in the Criminal Justice Field. A Note It Isn't How you Fall It is How you Get Up And No Matter What I Always Get Up, It About Me, and Making it, I have worked with homeless and s…
Lubomír Stejskal
Yeah, people love to pass on opportunities and then complain about those who did not and managed to succeed because of that.
John Doe
we all know Zuckerberg stole the Facebook idea from fellow alumni
Jerry Sam
Who stole the idea from myspace
Leoben DsFrendz
So whats in it for you? All Tech millionaires and billionaires stole, got ideas or learned from their peers or somewhere else, study each brand…. Whats impt is they made it bigtime billionaires innovators. Theres an abundance of people w bigger brains than they have. Why cant anybody do the same and…
Amos
totally agree man.
Thomas Schultz
you are right in 1 out of a million times - but if you are right a in that one of a millionth time then that is enough
David Purr
And then there is Steve Jobs, doesn’t really fit the mold. As you will find, many other great entrepreneurs and investors do not. Generalizations are easy to make but so often not true.
Syed Ali Aatif
He literally had sociopathic tendencies . Even his relationship with his own daughter was constrained.
Leoben DsFrendz
Ive observed all Great achievers, innovators, exceptional performers, thinkers, innocators, etc …have some sort of psycho trait disability.We just have to cherrypick the good and discard the bad. If nobody can explain it, guess its just how it is.
Sergio E.
He was a tyran not what a human being should be.
Patrick Holmes
I see he still has the same stupid hairstyle.
Alexander Ismail
His idea: “let's steal a local project from two nerds and use it to foster extreme right all over the World”.
Edward Ryan
I wouldn’t necessarily recommend that opportunity to just anyone. Imagine making Billionaires out of sociopaths and narcissists! And then ushering them into positions of power and authority, and then they’re invited to TED talks and WHO conferences! And before you know it, they are 40 years old and…
Leoben DsFrendz
Everybody wants to be like them exceptional achievers and their money, but nobody wants to experience the psycho part theyve been through or are currently carrying though not fault of their own.
Shiva Shankaran
What's the relation of your answer to the question?
Noor Fatima
No doubt every business needs attention and loyal hard worker like him
Elvira Ackerman
Yeah he also fucked Saverin over and he won via a lawsuit against his best friend.
Jerry Sam
How so if Saverin is a billionaire
Ashwin Kale
Here in India successful enterprises are familly businesses..
Friends or anyone needs almost free workers..
Jenny Huff
I've noticed that when a family is invested in a business they are more successful. They keep the business in the family and each member contributes and works hard. I'm talking about Indian families in America. Where I live there are several family owned businesses that are managed entirely by the f…
Ashwin Kale
Exactly
Yousafzai
Btw, who were the rest of 16 guys ? :)
Nitesh Kr
There were other co-founders as well such as (Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz anr Chris Hughes) and later on Eduardo Saverin left the Facebook.
Bob Smith
Yeah right… open door to lose all your stuff and more. Plus who wants to work with Zuckerberg, money is not everything in life.
Richard Amoako
The thousands of Facebook workers would disagree with you….
Dragos Leu
Correct.
VP
Not everyone can afford to work for free and that’s the reality. Same with unpaid internships.. this then causes an unfair advantage for someone who doesn’t come from a situation where their parents can fund their projects. Not showing up doesn’t mean disinterest… it means some have competing priori…
Jenny Huff
So many of these unpaid internships take advantage of workers who are not in a position to work for free. Especially when these companies can afford to pay them. They are told they will be paid in experience with a company that has a great name but could care less how that person is supposed to live…
Arvind Perumal
How does this answer the question?
Michael Mustang
So what about the sandals?
John Boyland
An open mind, sure, but not one so open that your brains fall out. The vast majority of business ventures started by college students Are not Facebook. They’re a waste of time and money that no one will even remember a year later. Just because someone wins the lottery every now and then does not mean…
BayuKa
Well the problem is that my friend sometimes stab me in tne back not with a knife but a chainsaw
Sep Maximilian
This doesn’t even answer the question.
G Coble
Does this answer the question? Did Zuck fail a few times?
Richard Mutumba
Do not forget that you need rich or well connected parents or both as well.
Mr Notifier
Why don’t you talk about many businessman failed, they also start bussines with so much effortness, but you just tell the story about the person who everyone knew him so rich ? Because it make you article always be right and seem to be convincing even the content may not meaning at all ?
Kresimir Jelusic
I talked to a bunch of friends to a bunch if opportunities, spent 50k€ and none of it came back in 15 years.. it’s less than 1% chance of making it, but we’re at it again
John Spartan
Why are his addidas flippies highlighted?
Alex Franklin
Imagine the other millions of times when friends have ideas that were worth shit.
Mark Schaumann
That T-Shirt is a front for the global Elite, Facebook was funded into existence with CIA seed money and is a surveillance operation
Kingpet Đức
Survivorship bias
Chris Parsons
For a second there I thought it was going to say he put 5 golden tickets in candy bars and invited the finders of said tickets to see his chocolate factory
Al Castro
Abraham Lincoln. Thank goodness he hit the nail with the success that mattered most.
Sean McDirmid
Survivor bias. There are many people who friends’ came to them with business opportunities who got totally burned. We just don’t get many articles about them.
Erastus Simoi
That’s true. Thank you so much for sharing.
Ardi Kule
I wish I had friends with investment capacity.
BELLO ABDULSHAHEED
BUILD YOUR INCOME #shortvideo #inspiration
Discover new opportunities to increase your earning potential. Embrace career change and step into success. Build your reputation to stand out and earn more....
https://youtube.com/shorts/N5uyRx5Qn5s
Shane Rennie
The prick has no original ideas, he stole facebook.
Bigrisksbigrewards
He stole the idea and had to pay a huge court sum
Clarence Leong
When you use more brain, you use less labor. When you use less brain, you use more labor. The one that uses more brain becomes a billionaire. The one that uses less brain works for the billionaire.
Dharmesh Devmurari
Whats the question and what's the answer.. I am not connected with it. Although good information. Thanks
Neeraj
I do have an idea, but no one to listen
Sundeep Bhat
Sure. Also buy lottery.
Internet and survivorship bias.
Cayt Navey (inspired by Doug Armey)
WTF is this ? This answer has no relevance to the question ? Q. is it possible for helicopter to land on moon ? A. Steve Jobs invented the iPhone.
Vishay
Q: How to fetch water from the well?
A: And that's how the purifier stores the water.
Marc Eisenberg
The founder of FedEx got a C+ at Yale for the business plan. Family money allowed him to start the business.
Michael Ogbodo
Some do not even know their business
Ubuntu
Having a business talk with your friends works most of the time.
Peter Sancroix
I know it’s a long shot but if time travel becomes a possibility I am willing to go to the meeting
Patricia Levi’s
Wow There are really good articles and interesting posts on your page. I checked your posts and you always posted good writing. Can you follow me back on Quora So i can always get notified in any of your posts and comments Thanks.
Milton Rodrigues
Maybe we miss the point here ? Zuckerberg was prepared to SHARE his deal with the other 2/3 … in fact I think 🤔 it was EDUARDO SAVERIN and those TWINS, who actually rowed in the Olympics. For them, this was bigger than winning the EURO-MILLIONS LOTTO ? 👌👌👌
Paresh Terse
so whats the question ?
Jesus Santos
Even if I knew I would not become a millionaire, I would go to hear about new ideas (by a Harvard intelligent student, anyway)
Emre Sever
I am wondering what the three other guys are doing now.
Big Jay
Are we just still gonna pretend that Zuckerberg didn't steal the Facebook concept off those Harvard Grads?
Krzysztof Kunicki
As real as other, “American dream“ stories.
Pradeep
Nope 👎 my homies still believe they can make a large robot dild0.
L Gure
Becoming a billionaire is not for everyone. Their vision of the future is very different from ordinary mortals. They are molded differently. Their passion is intense and deep. That’s the reason that with billions of people on earth, only a handful of them exist.
Voters should be free to elect their representatives. We survived 45, though barely.
I honestly don’t understand why we are so neuralgic about the specific issue of age. The issue is FITNESS, not age. Many people are living longer, healthier lives… so of course the average age is going up.
Lots of demanding professions have base line mental and physical fitness standards to make sure they can do the job.
If we were serious about this question, we would have a battery of mental, emotional, and physical fitness tests that everyone running for National office (including Supreme Court justices) would receive at the time of their first candidacy and every 6 years thereafter. After age 75 tests would come every year. This would be a non partisan qualification to stay in the pool of those fit for office.
Maybe we could screen out a few of the psychopaths and personality disorders before it’s too late.
So, you want to empty the House of Republicans?
Who should decide for you which person should represent your interests?
As long as you are a well informed, rational human being, you should vote for your representative who should meet the same prerequisites.
One reason why Congress is getting older is that life expectancy has risen from around 60 in the 1920s to over 77 today. 100 years ago many of these old members of Congress would not have survived into there 80s and 90s. That being said, as we age, health issues grow, we naturally slow down, and cannot do demanding work as effectively. Therefore, there is a time we need to step aside and retire. For many members of Congress, it is hard to give up the power. With the aid of their staff who do much of the work, older members continue long after they have the stamina for the job. Sen. Dianne Feinstein, being pushed around in a wheelchair by here staff, is a prime example.
Why is the Republicans' distribution skewed lower? Do they not live as long?
Someone would have to explain to me why age is an issue in regards to elected representatives. Voters elect representatives. Do voters know the ages of the people they vote for? Voters cannot vote for anyone below the age of, let’s say, twelve because the community assumes twelve year-olds cannot comprehend the interests and perform the representative duties required by the community. Should people over, let’s say seventy-five, not be allowed to run for representative office because they cannot performed the required duties of the office they are seeking. If so, maybe those over seventy-five years of age should not be allowed to vote. The point here is why isn’t the focus on VOTERS as opposed to elected representatives? I can answer that: because it is easier to address the effects of a problem rather than the cause of a problem. Just ask the pharmaceutical industry. The dumbing-down of American representative democracy is an endless journey.
From 8 years ago...... .......https://josephurban.wordpress.com/2015/01/07/80-is-the-new-36/
I think Feinstein is too far gone to even make a rational decision about resigning.
Term Limits…..
Rs and Ds need to cut a deal ... Mitch and Feinstein go home
... not quite an even deal. KY's Dem governor has already laid the groundwork for filling such a vacancy with a Dem. The state legislature passed a law saying an appointed Senator needs to be from the same party as the one who vacated the seat. But there's a compelling case that the law is unconstitutional.
Not only is there no provision or mention of political parties in the Constitution, but its authors explicitly warned against them.
I have voted for Feinstein forever and now she needs to call it quits. She needs to go home and take care of herself and allow the governor to temporarily replace her with a younger black female until the next election.
California will do what it can to deliver on increasing diversity in the congress no matter what the MAGA Zombies want.
California is where woke goes to live!
The front runner for that spot is marginally younger than Feinstein. Barbara Lee is 77.
Age is up, IQ is down. Thanks to the MAGATS.
It is a dangerous thing for a nation to be guided and ruled(!) by the experiences and prejudices (not just racial) of a hundred years ago. Especially, given how much our world has been transformed in that hundred years and what a dangerous precipice we stand on in multiple ways. People who cling to power with their last breath do so only for the sake of power and those with few years left to live care *nothing* for the future that, long ago, became unreal to them. This is all possible because our so-called democracy is petrifying into a puppet show for the Oligarchy.
Having said all of that, statistics are tricky things. On a simplistic level, there are far more 80 uo in congress today because far more people live to be 80. It would be interesting to know how many office holders retired in past periods of history. What is the average number of terms that they served? How long were they out of office before they died? That might give a better idea of how we compare to the past. However, it does not change the fact that a nation should not be led by it's great great grandparents.
In the 1960s and 70s young people were drawn to politics in order to make a difference. What we the Boomer generation has done to politics has given Millennials and Gen Z the opposite urge. I have to think the conservative majority on the Supreme Court gets a great deal of blame for that with Citizens United.
That decision monetized politics more than any other event. If any decision should be overturned that is the one. Because the GOP has not brought up a fake case to get this overturned tells me that they feel that it benefits them the most.
Follow the money. Start w Heritage Foundation.
Don't be too worried about age. Age is not the problem, vulgarity, lack of decency and sense of propriety are. The most repulsive members of the House for example are relatively young: George Santos is 35 years old, Marjorie Taylor is 49, Lauren Boebert is 36, Matt Gaetz is 41, Madison Cawthorm was 25 when he was elected. While the Tea Partiers that gained notoriety during the administration of Obama were also young, Ted Cruz, Jim Jordan, Jason Chaffetz.
Judge them according to the content of their character not according to their age.
Those "representatives" are in a class by themselves when it comes to impropriety.
Ted Cruz abandoned their little family dog Snowflake to die in the worst ice storm Texas ever experienced. For that alone he should be thrown out of Congress.
Two words. Term limits.
Or as Trump might say it, "one word, term limits."
Ballot access for independents would solve a lot of this. Easier than getting congress to police themselves.
Whatever that means.
America's political "representation" has gotten really old...
People are individuals, not ages, races, religions, parties, genders, etc.
So you oppose the 35 year old limit in the constitution as well? And you don't think that there should be an age requirement for driving a motor vehicle, voting, etc.?
Some are ethical and duty driven others are in it just for the power.
Congress: A place where America comes to die.
The Constitution has an age limit for eligibility to be elected President.
It’s logical that the Constitution should be amended to have an upper age limit for serving as President, in Congress and on SCOTUS.
In corporate America, they have mandatory age limits.
A majority of firms in the S&P 1500, and more than a third of S&P 500 firms, have policies in place that mandate the retirement of their CEOs at age 65, including General Electric, Altria, ExxonMobil, and Intel.
The Federal Government should emulate this practice.
With all the advances in modern medicine, we can see where our SCOTUS Justices and our Senators could be serving into their second century of life.
It’s logical that the Constitution should be amended to have an upper age limit for serving as President, in Congress and on SCOTUS.
^ Disagree - thought I'd dearly love to have more youthful POTUS; that said I also believe that Biden's age aka longevity is the reason he was able to beat Trump; he had a very long record of accomplishment including VEEP; during his tenure he has gotten along well with republicans who began to savage him as soon as he took office, see McConnell/Graham.
On upper limit - the candidates age was know when they won the election; at that time we had a choice and selected elderly; we cannot bemoan age when it was very much on display.
Additionally, not only did an aged Trump win; he had no experience and thus far a solid lock on MAGA_Republicans; so much so that the others fear him; his base is lusty with boos for everyone else; they attacked the nations capitol all to push a lie.
Just a reminder that old Joe has done more in his three years of office than most modern era presidents.
OMG, get out! Retire.
I’ll take an 80 year old Pelosi over a 30 something Boebert and Gaetz anyday.
They are also deciding laws on new technologies and have no idea how it works.
So are the founding fathers, but according to "originalists" this is the way it was intended. No women or children and blacks were 1/3 of a person.
The constitution and the resulting laws were designed to be flexible enough to adapt to changes both technological and societal. The GOP through SCOTUS has determined that the inherent flexibility is "woke."
I believe that term limits not specific age is a better approach.
I confess that these are the politician who likely best represent me... sigh.
Maybe it isn't the age- but the integrity...
Good point if congress was substantially younger you could see a whole array of benefits being shut down for the elderly. The spectral shift of congress serves the needs of the people better. As for the integrity my personal experience is that the younger set believes that cheating and lying is acceptable to get ahead. Recent article about resumes in WAPO confirmed that notion.
It's not the age of congress but the age of likely voters that determines pointing benefits at older people. Someone over 60 is far more likely to vote than someone under 35.
Because the aged can't possibly be expected to understand "laws on new technologies." You are a bigot.
Ageism is the last accepted form of bigotry in this country.
I would bet I'm older than both of you. If you haven't hit your 70th then I am correct. I am a retired engineer that is not afraid of technology like so many of our congressman and women that have not taken the time to understand what they are voting for. To watch them in real time in congressional hearing stumble over their own words because they don't understand technology makes me sick. So saying that I am a bigot just shows your bias more than anything!
I would bet I'm older than both of you. If you haven't hit your 70th then I am correct. I am a retired engineer that is not afraid of technology like so many of our congressman and women that have not taken the time to understand what they are voting for. To watch them in real time in congressional hearing stumble over their own words because they don't understand technology makes me sick. So saying that I am a bigot just shows your bias more than anything!
"But the older generations still dominate Congress..."
I'm pretty well convinced we'd be getting better, more realistic, responsive climate legislation if we had many fewer "older" representatives---who won't have to live with, or die because of escalating climate "blinking red lights" & alarms.
Older reps tend towards dismissal because of their "time-bubble" & resistant vested interests/supporters recognizing their behavior/practices have to change. Hard to convince anyone who owns multiple residences in various climates that obscures (for them) overall trend lines.
Psst…you stand a far better chance at climate regulation with an 80 year old democrat like Pelosi’s than you would with a 30 year old Republican like Boebert, Gaetz, Stephanik etc…
BS. Most of us care deeply about our offspring and the future of the world. You re listening to a few rich and selfish so and sos.
What I cannot understand is why the young folks stand around moaning about the elders running things instead of oh say voting themselves? Getting out to support parties that come close and turning them into somehting better? Running for office the,selves?
Don t you whine about Boomers as long as you sit and crying instead of getting up and acting.
We re the ones who drove back the fascist forces 50 years ago and we re still trying to hold those dikes alone.
We are living longer and having fewer children. Therefore, the need for term limits increases, or else we'll have the same people in office for decades.
The public and McConnell's constituents fewer e to know exactly what the neck happened hete, not simply have it brushed off as "I'm fine now".
It’s good they have access to that amazing government funded free healthcare.
Et cetera...
No they pay for coverage just like other citizens although they do have a very generous retirement package. Perhaps more should use it.
Hmm. Looks as if there are far more Dems than Republicans older than 70 in Congress. It must therefore be a good and just and right thing because we walk the path of goodness and justice and righteousness in all our ways. But if it were bad, it’d be the GOP’s fault.
Interesting report on an aging congress, but it’s not surprising as life expectancy increases so does the average age of Congress. Has congress aged more quickly than society as a whole?
I’d say yes, and a bigger yes to some Yorkshire Puddings.
The current class of lawmakers is one of the oldest in history, with an overall median age of 59. The median age of senators is 65, the highest on record. In the House, the median age has hovered between 57 and 58 for the past decade, higher than in any year before that period.
Gerry, meet Mandering.
The interesting thing is that there are actually more people under 40 on the GOP side of the House in the chart and more people under 50 in the Senate on the GOP side. Unexpected.
This tells me that the Democrats are not preparing the next generation for leadership.
My suggestion is that the Senate vote to expel both Diane and Mitch simultaneously to keep things even-Steven. Al it takes is a 2/3 vote. But that will never happen, because the same thing will (or should) happen to them as their brain cells slough off.
As much as I respect 80-year-olds, being one of them, there is no way a person that old should be President -- or in the senate. There may be no dementia, but forgetfulness and simple lack of energy cause bad decisions.
Trump is in a class of his own. He has spent a lifetime of doing the evil he does, and it is so ingrained that he can spew it with energy in his sleep. But don't ask him to think thoughtfully about anything.
So what? The article lacks any attempt to offer insight or context on whether this a good thing or a bad thing and why. We know that the leaders of our "representative democracy" are not representative on a variety of dimensions-- race, gender, income, occupation, among other things. Maybe this body was representative when both its members and the voters were limited to property owning white males. The latter has changed, the former has not. And commentators in the Post and elswhere wonder why people have lost confidence in this institution.
I did not realize the average age dipped so low in the 80's.
Maybe that is why age limits were put on the back-burner.
Committee assignment and ego are keeping most of these folks here too long.
Age limits, term limits needed
Humm, the Dems look pretty flat in their age distribution. The Repubs look like they have killed off their elder statesmen, what's with that?
The Constitution sets minimum ages for elected offices, so it is clearly constitutional for Congress to set maximum limits, say 70. Doing so would also discourage the re-election of representatives and senators only because they accumulated seniority in the House or Senate and can therefore control key committees.
Given longer productive lifespans, an increase in workforce age is generally expected. Wisdom, not age, is the essential criteria for knowing what to do, when, and how. Those concerned about not having enough youthful input need look no further than the Congressional staffers who are considerably younger and able to provide a youthful perspective to decisions. When voters choose competence and wisdom over politicians pushing phony issues, we will get the representation and leadership the country needs. Until then, our Congress will reflect our own, poor choices that hurt us all.
"Sudden freeze up"
He had an ffffffing stroke.
Orwellian at WaPo.
Do you expect WaPo to call it a stroke when no medical determination has been made public?
He looked like he was possibly having an absence seizure, which wouldn't be surprising after his fall and concussion several months ago.
I had them when young. Usually, they were accompanied by music generated by my brain. Had one during a piano recital. Didn't miss a lick on the piano even though I blanked for several minutes.
Dang! That brought back a memory. I had a similar experience during my piano recital, only i un-blanked during the piece, didn't know where I was, and just got up and walked off.
Was it really a concussion several months ago? Or another TIA?
Feinstein, McConnell and other Congress members in their age group should retire. They simply cling to power for power's sake and offer no benefits to the country. In fact, they harm the country.
It's high time to institute age and term limits in Congress. Mandatory retirement age will weed out the doddering power-sucking greedy malingerers and term limits might help minimize the damage caused by blustering idiots.
If you are concerned about the direction our country is heading as a result of know nothings (i.e. - the modern Republican Party); then you should contact your local Democratic Party, and do your part, however small it may be, to ensure that this mentally and morally challenged party is thrown out of office in 2024.
I live in Latvia, which has a 100-member unicameral parliament. Our most recent election was last October. The youngest elected MP was 23, while the oldest was 74. The average age is 48.3 years old. There are only a few political parties in this country which have been successful for more than one or two election cycles. In last October's election only three of the seven parties that were represented in the previous session won sufficient support to win seats in the new session. This means lots and lots or turnover. It is also true that parties in Latvia are elected on the basis of candidate lists and not individual candidates. In America, you have first past the post in the House and the Senate and, for all practical purposes, only two parties. That means that a single senator or House member can, indeed, hang on longer than might seem advisable. I think our system here in Latvia is better, at least one the basis of this one very specific issue.
Important things can still get done with a high rate of turnover? Just curious. That's been an argument here against term limits in both houses. Like 2 terms in the Senate, 6 in the House, which would each be 12 years. Of course not much gets done here!
You wonder why a Feinstein won her last election? Because no good Democrats ran against her. California has good Democrats that could run but for some reason people are afraid to disturb the structure.
The average age of Congress is rising.
There's no one to blame but the voters. :-|
I blame the campaign finance system, which forces unwanted candidates down voters' throats.
I still blame voters.
I am 68. Boomer. Why are we and Silents and Greatest making laws and judging issues we A) no little about and B) won't be around to be affected? We had our chances. We blew it (climate change anyone)? Step aside. Or are you so addicted to power and perks, you just can't let go?
Congress is a country club. Once you're in, you never want to leave.
Career politicians are the problem. This is all they know. Their egos won't let them retire. We also have more millionaires in government than ever before. We need limits on all of it. They won't limit themselves. Once elected their hand is in the cookie jar. They aren't giving it up until they are taken out on a stretcher.
I am getting a bit weary of articles complaining about old people not caring about younger people; old people being senile; wealthy people not caring about the poor; people who were brought up in a racist society being racist; and so on. The characteristic of age or wealth (or lack thereof) does not define who you are, what you are capable of doing, or what you think. Joe Biden has a wealth of experience in his work and has used it for our country to the good. Would you rather have DeSantis (for example) because he is younger?
There is more than about age. The incidents have involved HEALTH. If you are an Iron Man athlete that's one thing but clearly we're NOT talking about that.
Not just age limits but term limits are needed, specially for SCOTUS. We need younger folks who are living and will continue to live through these existential threats (eg Global warming) to humanity
Where’s the chart depicting efficiency?
If she were Dianne Smith instead of Dianne Feinstein she would be propped up by the fish tank or the Weather Channel in the memory care unit while her accounts and assets are seized to pay for her care.
Once these people get a little bit of power, it's hard for them to give it up.
best reason for TERM LIMITS...
Vote. That’s what term limits are. A lot of these old geezers are still in there because people vote for them. And there’s something to be said especially if you’re a senator the longer you stay in the more influence you gain, and the more things you can do for your state.
Voting only goes so far. Why? Because it's hard to get candidates because of the money involved. There is so much money in politics right now. In 1990, the average campaign cost $407, 000. Last year? 2.35 million. The average person doesn't have enough money to get very far. You must already have a lot of money, especially if you are the opposite party (d in red state, r in blue state). Never mind that the name recognition claims the major party money raised.
Citizens united, lack of term limits, and long campaigns have ruined politics for the younger generations. It's hard to pay for your kids, mortgage, and find time to fundraise millions of dollars.
We get the government we deserve.
We get the government that is forced on us thanks to Citizens United.
I'm 65 and 80 is too old to be in Congress. The US looks feeble on the world stage. Biden can't read a teleprompter are we expected to believe he's running the country?
Trump is the stable genius who decried the use of prompters until his staff pressed him to use them to mitigate his "word salad rants" during events.
By essentially every parameter, the country is doing much better under Biden than it did under Trump. And as far as running the country is concerned, Trump's only plank in his platform for 2024 is "vengeance".
There was a similar article about this in the Atlantic a while back. Running for a national office does require making connections, having some experience under your belt and being fairly well off.
It’s especially true in the Senate where I believe everyone with a couple of exceptions are multi-millionaires.
And to be honest, some of these younger members are completely unqualified, except they’re telegenic and have a Twitter feed or say stupid things and get a following.
EXAMPLES: AOC, MTG, Anna Paulina Luna, Bobert etc
IMHO, comparing AOC to the crazy MTG and Luna is ludicrous
Wearing an “Eat the Rich” dress and cavorting with rich people while pretending to represent all the brown people in her district is pretty stupid.
Some of the younger people may be unqualified, but so are the older people. Need we be reminded of the ridiculous questions asked when social media and internet bills came before Congress? At least AOC and MTG know what dial up versus fiber internet connections are.
Yes, age is important but perspective and philosophy are of greater importance. Are they impacted by your life experiences and the age in which you came of age? Sure, but in our current situation what is critical is which of two paths you as a pol pledge to take; forward or backward.
There is no doubt which of these two paths the dominant philosophy of the two major parties are committed to. Hard evidence is the legislative cluster muck now on display in the House of Representatives and in numerous state legislatures across the nation. The choice among all voters regardless of age is very simple. Forward or actually believing you can turn back the clock and recapture some mythical time when we were a white Christian nation ruled by an economic elite who was deeply committed to ideas which consigned more than half of us to second and third class citizenship.
The Progressive agenda is not perfect but it, at least , addresses the issues of the day and the future. My old party, the GOP , has regressed from being conservative to repressive in order to retain what power it gained. And, worst of all it now embraces principles of exclusion. It's once highly touted "big tent" has closed to women, non whites, the poor and, yes, anyone who might not identify as " straight" as if one's sexuality is a choice instead of, yes, how God did make you. Talk about a contradiction! To actually embrace a version of Christianity predicated on hatred and exclusion rather than love.
I now vote almost solidly Democrat not because I believe in everything some in that party push but because the option from the other side has become bereft of logic, common sense, and, yes, principle. It is my hope millions of younger Americans (I am 82) to join me this election cycle to send a message to what is left of the Republican Party it is time to start looking forward and not backward.
Brilliantly written.
It is a foolish notion that the elderly in our gov't will be replaced by the young
Old people are always replace by new old people. Old people are not going anywhere.
There is a pathetic sickness to those that can afford to comfortably retire and don't.
Personally, I think they are very empty people and their job is their method to side step human consciousness, the Mother of all horrors.
Biden should set an example and resign due to his advanced age and growing dementia
Point taken.
1. This article would have been much more worth reading if it contained anything but the raw numbers.
2. I'm not a big fan of age limits, but I think a term limit of 5 or 6 terms in the Senate would be appropriate. After that long, senators shouldn't be reelected no matter how old they are, because they'll be too firmly ensconced, regardless of their mental state.
In the current Senate, a 36-year limit would mean that Grassley and McConnell couldn't have been reelected. A 30-year limit would have eliminated Feinstein and Patty Murray.
3. Maybe we could have a rule where senatorial candidates above a certain age have to have a "running mate" who will take over if the senator is incapacitated, so that the voters know who's waiting in the wings.
The problem is that the people already in Congress (consciously or not) enact laws that favor their own generation. This makes it increasingly difficult for the subsequent/ younger generations to build wealth, and have or raise the type of money required to run for Congress.
Someone recently tweeted
For an American aged 80+ there are only two types of work available:
1. Walmart greeter
2. US elected politician
I think age limits are well overdue and I'm already above them.
I think 76 should be the age limit to run for office and 80 should be the mandatory retirement age for all Congress people, all Judges and for the President and Vice President.
I get so frustrated every time a senior citizen government office holder rattles off some plan that I don't agree with. So many Congress people do not have any military experience and yet control the military e.g. Sen. Tuberville.
Our country is in need of age limits.
We have many in government that lack comprehension and are completely illiterate in most technologies.
Please, enough about Trump...
If Californians want to re-elect - yes, I know she is not running - Senator DF, then they have that right, one that should not be taken from them.
Same for Mitch...
Sadly, these older people in Congress need to retire. When one is no longer effective in your job, it is time to move on. Same for judges and the Supreme Court. We really need term limits for all these positions.
No...
As NY Mayor Ed Koch once said, "The people have spoken...and they must be punished."
The system has been corrupted by gerrymandering and money. Hopefully someday a third party will break through and upset the status quo.
Congress is the nation’s senior center complete with a bickering bunch of old folks eating lunch in the cafeteria.
Why would a young person want to spend time there?
(Edited)
The depends generation is taking over and holding on to their last day because they have non-jobs just talking heads
It takes a least a decade to make an effective politician ready for national office. You start off on something like a school board where you learn how to read and implement government regulations. You move in to town or city office where you learn how to deal with constituents and deliver service. Then you move on to state wide legislative office where you start to learn how to write laws and work with parties and voting blocks - basically, how to get laws pass.
You are not going to find college courses to teach you this. There are no degrees. And haven't we all seen how bad it gets when people take short cuts around this apprenticeship. Ever time some puffed-up person who believes years in business or as a celebrity decides that they can shirt-cut around the training with their wealth, the people end up paying for it.
So, if you really want younger people in Congress, they have to start younger and not wait until they are in their 40s to run. This isn't a conspiracy. It is about learning how to do the job.
Absolutely and why it is critical to VOTE in every local, state and national election.
Or you can say outrageous things, develop a retinue of on-line followers, and run for Congress.
TERM LIMITS TERM LIMITS TERM LIMITS TERM LIMITS
The average lifespan in the US in 1930 for males was 58.
Average age of House, 54 , Senate 58
The average lifespan in the US in 2020 for males was 77
Average age of House 58, Senate 64
I think the problem is exacerbated by party politics. There is this entrenched anointing process (see Hillary) and fear of weakening incumbents with challengers (see Biden and Feinstein) because these politicians refuse to let go. To my knowledge the only politician I’ve seen hand the keys over to a successor is Pelosi. LBJ I guess….
Feinstein should not have run six years ago. Yes - Californians elected her, but they had no choice did they? I’d have voted for her too if she was the nominee. When Schumer is nominated again and runs against some loon GOP candidate I’ll have no choice either.
Biden and the Dems should be ‘succession planning.’ The problem is they’re all Logan Roy. None of them wants to give it up.
The distribution of house democrats is really interesting. Compared to the senate and house republicans, it seems fairly even. I notice a spike at 68, 58 and 47. I wonder what that is.
The American people don't take their politics seriously enough. These politicians conduct serious business for the people. Just voting for a name or a party or to make a statement is destroying the nation.
What would the Senate be without Bernie?, Angus King is about 80 and he looked very sharp on the committees. His questioning was dead on. Susan Collins is mediocre and always was,. I could do without her. She thought Trump learned from impeachment #1. And she voted for Kavanaugh despite a promise to protect Rowe.
Admittedly, most of the better-known octogenarians are still in full command of their capacities, but term limits remain imperative as a remedy against career politicians’ over time developing walls of resistance against challenges of their abuses for personal gain and disregard of all voters’ interests.
Ambivalent,
But what about the truly loved politicians who win by a landslide? Term limits deprive them of their choice.
I propose a compromise. Raise the percentage by which an incumbent must win. Surely Bernie sanders can get 52% of the vote.
The average age of Congress is rising. That’s unlikely to change soon.
Average human lifespans are rising as well, and medical capability to extend and preserve life has never been better.
For thousands of years cultures before ours revered their older members, respecting the value of their accumulated experience and wisdom.
The term "Elders" has been used to describe leaders the world over. As long as a person retains their mental faculties age is not a barrier to leadership; it is in fact an advantage because an older person will have more experience to draw on to make judgements.
I do favor term limits for non-elected government positions, such as SCOTUS Justices, but for elected positions let voters decide when a person is past their prime. In the end it's not about age but about results.
The odious Moscow Mitch McConnell apparently doesn’t have the mental faculties to be Senate Minority Leader. I fear he has mental lapses off camera that we never hear about. Chuck Grassley and Dianne Feinstein also have questionable abilities. I support age and term limits. I believe many voters simply vote their party line without careful consideration of the individual candidate. Consequentially, we have a geriatric Congress.
People have the right to vote for whoever they want to represent them.
If they choose someone impaired by age, by a mental defect or some other detriment they can do so, and it is not the right of other people to tell them they cannot make that choice.
In 2016 we elected someone with a number of mental defects as the President of the United States. That was an incredibly bad mistake that we are still having to pay for, but it was the people's choice under the rules by which we run our democracy.
People make mistakes. Smart people learn from them.
The problem is that the people already in Congress (consciously or not) enact laws that favor their own generation. This makes it increasingly difficult for the subsequent/ younger generations to build wealth, and have or raise the type of money required to run for Congress.
Bernie Sanders is one of the oldest members of Congress at 81, but his goals find great acceptance among both young and old.
I'm sure some in elected office favor their own generation more than others but that would tend to make them less electable over time.
Age bias will be found out by voters and end up being a problem that voters solve themselves.
I'm not a big fan of age limits, but I think a term limit of 5 or 6 terms in the Senate would be appropriate. After that long, senators shouldn't be reelected no matter how old they are, because they'll be too firmly ensconced, regardless of their mental state.
In the current Senate, a 36-year limit would mean that Grassley and McConnell couldn't have been reelected. A 30-year limit would have eliminated Feinstein and Patty Murray.
Elections are a natural way to exercise term limits.
Voters decide when a person is too old to serve them well.
Its not age that is the problem so much as it is the corruption, addiction to money and power, hatred of the poor and vulnerable and unwillingness to represent the majority who are pro-choice and demand federal gun control legislation.
And that applies especially to many younger people in Congress, especially those on the right — Matt Gaetz, Nancy Mace, Lauren Boebert for example. There are a lot of older Democrats in Congress like Pelosi who fight to save programs to protect the poor and vulnerable, to expand access to health care, support women’s right to choose and regulate guns.
I would take Nancy Pelosi any day over the much more youthful Mace or Boebert.
So not Congress being old but Congress having too many Republicans of any age.
Yes!
No age limit there!
The average American is 38.1 years old (in 2019). The average age of a U.S. Senator is almost twice that, at age 65. How can we expect people twice the age of average Americans to pass laws that consider or benefit them?
It's about what's best for the nation, not a particular age group of the population or constituency. Some life experience as an adult is appropriate.
People in their late forties to mid sixties are probably best suited.
Politicians are like pro athletes. They hang on beyond their prime years because they can't give it up. Most of them don't know how to do anything else and have never had a real job to put food on the table with a paycheck. The corrupt system in place makes politicians rich and athletes make far too much money. Same with Hollywood actors. They all use their resources to stay in control. We can see decline of athletes and eventually they retire. Politicians stay far too long. We desperately need term limits now. We need younger people in power with fresh ideas for the current world. Nobody wants an 80 year old President. We have many talented people in their 50s and 60s with quality experience who should be in power.
Comment of the day!
Nancy Pelosi reached her prime in her seventies when she played a key role in getting the Affordable Care Act passed and she went on to accomplish a whole lot more. Right now two Senators that you would see pushed out because of their age — the 74 year old Elizabeth Warren and the 81 year old Bernie Sanders — are pushing hard for a crackdown on insider trading.
Dimple truth.Young people want nothing to do with politics.
Not true. The old establishment won't let go.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2022/10/19/ryan-ohio-senate-vance-democrats/
Yes, dimpled people make cute politicians.
Maybe members of Congress should be screened for dementia, starting at age 70.
MTG is demented, and she's nowhere near 70 !
TFG is demented and will be 83 at the end of a second term.
The problem is that we have strayed from the Founders’ design, which didn’t involve antibiotics or chemotherapy or sterile surgeries for elected leaders. We can solve our problem by returning to the Founders’ original vision.
Founders?? Founders?? Founders??
Yeah_Sure, let's idealize a bunch of Rich_White_Slave_Owners some more??.
It is almost like we need to see a shrink. This absolute need to Worship these people. The sooner we let go with that 250-(and change) year old document, the sooner we can fix our country.
I think you need to leave this country.
I just don’t trust Americans today to improve on the Constitution. If it is torn up and redone it could easily be worse.
Actually, 250 minus some change. And perhaps you should have read past the word “Founders.”
""I think you need to leave this country.""
Gee. Can you help me find a job in the EU???
Easy to say "You don't like it, get the hell _out".
In fact any 12-year_old bully in the elementary school can shoot his mouth like that.
Term limits!
2 for POTUS
4 for the House.
3 for Senate
2 years for Judges
Age should have nothing to do with it. Limit the time in power no matter how old or how "good" the person might be.
A rolling stone gathers no moss
So you shouldn't be allowed to continue even when you're doing a good job?
Who defines "good"?
Many think Trump did a good job. Personally I would disagree wholeheartedly, and 4 years was 4 years too long!
See?
I did mean to say 20 years for judges, not 2. That's what happens when you don't proofread your comments!
I have been convinced for years that term limits on the order of 3-4 terms in the house, 2 in the senate and 1 longer term as president (perhaps 6 years) combined with campaign finance reform would do more good for the nation than any other efforts. Fix the system before the symptoms.
If Feinstein retired now, Newsom could appoint a Democrat in that spot. But Republicans would not allow that new Democrat to take Feinstein's seat on committees. They have to grab power wherever they can, no matter how unethically.
When the Senate sets up rules at the beginning, they need to take into account the ages of their members and that there will be illnesses and such. They need to change the rule that allows them to replace a member on a committee should it become necessary.
But we do need a younger government. Am older myself. We need more fire and fight.
They should have kept her off that committee at the start of this congress. These people all lack the will to do tough things. It is their exclusive club and how dare you question a fellow member.
View from outside USA, your leadership is too old. Hanging on like grim death to the power of Politics and the Judiciary. USA is Big country with many talented young people. Australian voters overwhelmingly voted to amend our Constitution for High Court judges to retire at aged 70. Unfortunately diminished cognitive decline means some Officials do not know when their time s up and your country is poorer for it.
Age with grace, and let the young take over when it’s time 🧑🏻‍🦳👨🏻‍🦳
You have to look at this from a distance. Our society is corrupt.
These guys, from Feinstein, that Kentucky_guy, or Biden, they all have a group of people who are, so called assistants. They also push the person to stay where he/she is because it suites THEM.
These Congress people, as long as their front person is in D.C., they get to stay in D.C. with that salary. With Biden, on top of all the DNC people, it is one of his grand kids who likes to continue to live in the WH. She and her husband both work for Biden, and live in the WH.
""So, Yeah_Grand_Pa run for 2024. I like to continue to live in the WH".
Everybody is out for "Number_Uno".
How can anyone in this country expect to retire, if the leaders on Congress can't even do it?
People often are wiser when older and if they are healthy and able to continue working then let them do what they can do. Getting good people to run for office is hard because they have to be able to raise millions to compete, have to support themselves and family while running and must be able to land on their feet job wise and financially if they lose. If that doesn’t shrink the number of people wanting to hold office, add to it the dirty underwear airing and the creating of fake or enhanced versions of said dirt designed to destroy the credibility and marketable persona of a candidate. This isn’t for a young person who works and has a family. It is for someone backed by a very wealthy person or a very wealthy person. Older people may have made it inherited their own fortune and that gives them a bit of freedom to act and be political. Frankly many older people are quite competent. And some younger ones may have more energy and fewer wrinkles, but they are not capable of analyzing a situation, crating good sellable policies and holding together their people. Just disregard policies pushed and contrast the effectiveness of former Speaker of the House Pelosi with current Speaker of the House McCarthy who is much younger than Pelosi. Pelosi wins.
Taxation without representation. No wonder most adults under the age of 25 cannot afford to buy a house or have children these days. No one at the Federal level is there to vote for their interests.
Vote for the right people instead of whining 😎
Who said I don't vote?
Age gives experience so again, vote for the right people to represent your interests. 😉
I don't suppose Congress will pass upper age limits for office, just as we have lower limits for office or voting age. You could argue some people can serve capably in their 80's, but then again some 12 year olds might be informed voters.
Turn the graph sideways and the House chart has a bell shaped curve to it. Yep, we the baby boomers are still dominating. And unlike corporations, these leaders have fabulous benefits and staff who are willing elderly caretakers for great resumes. Our Founding Fathers and their peers had a life expectancy of maybe their 50’s. To them, living well into the 80’s didn’t factor in. But Franklin, Jefferson and Adams did live to be elderly. So hence, I guess they only saw a need for minimum ages, maximum ages didn’t seem needed. We’re stuck with them all!
Don’t criticize Feinstein and Grassley. Blame stupid California and Iowa.
And we should also blame the states and districts that elect people like Trump, Green, Boebert, Cruz, DeSantis, Abbott, Gaetz, etc...
Who or what do we actually blame for electing the biggest mistakes in history? Education? Television? Apathy? Ignorance? Stupidity? All of the above?
Nope. Hold the individuals accountable for their failure to represent their constituents. They are of no use to themselves nor to anyone else and are both drains on American resources.
A big part of the problem is that so many current politicians, Justices, etc. have no life outside of politics. That's why they run. That's why they stay, I have a tough time thinking of even one Republican (and many Dems too) who could hold a 10-minute conversation if you didn't talk politics.
Trump has a life outside of politics:
1) Golfing - all day everyday (and he still stinks at it)
2) Shuffling boxes filled with classified documents around Mar-a-Lago
3) Searching for lawyers for his many criminal charges and civil suits
He has a life _after_ politics thanks to his foresight while being president. Golfing, btw, is part of a life in politics; it appears to be the sport of choice on Capitol Hill.
If you're in politics, you're going to have an ego and won't want to retire. Voters love a familiar name and will keep voting for their representative until they die. If people treated an election like a job interview, instead of a chance to prove their party loyalty, the U.S. would have better leadership.
Either we let the voters decide or we change the Constitution.
Easy or hard?
That is what's wrong with our nation. Older folks want to go backwards, not forward.
Baby boomers were born between 1946 and 1964. The Civil Rights Act was only signed in 1964. So they all grew up in a much more racist society.
We had the New Left and I met several Spanish Civil War veterans, the Lincoln Brigade. They were in their 40's to 50's, then. The Left of their era had been anti racist.
The article is missing a larger point that this isn't actually just in politics. The average age of upper management is also ticking up all over. You find the same thing in workplaces with boomers working past the retirement age and holding onto positions into their 70s. No, not just for more money. It's entirely representative of the boomer stranglehold on the population, and the mindset of enjoying leadership positions (as well as everything else) so much that there isn't much care at all for the ones below them.
More ageism, as if we were a club
Just because someone is older doesn't mean they don't have the capacity to deal with complex situations as demanded by their government position.
All representatives should have physical and psychological evaluations to insure they are able to deal with the demands of their office at ages the medical profession can determine physical and mental changes may occur.
The results of which should be made available to all other representatives or a select committee and if needed those in question need to be considered for replacement.
You are denying the following generations leadership positions and experience in those positions, while ignoring what they clearly bring to the table compared to out of touch old folks that can't understand social media, Tik Tok, or AI. It's not just about if you "can" do it. That's the entire boomer problem. There is absolutely 0 thought given to next generations and what they need to succeed. Entirely selfish and greedy in all aspects.

Former British Prime Minister Boris #Johnson wore a #Ukrainian embroidered shirt (also called Vyshyvanka).
It has #Ukraine embroidered on its heart.
Criminel de guerre.
Show replies
Looop this pic don’t even look real! And I not even been to SpecSavers lol
Sooo sweet…
NickTheGoldGuy
Dingleberry
Digital Bo
real?
Clarity Bot
Former British PM Boris Johnson was spotted wearing a Ukrainian embroidered shirt (vyshyvanka). The shirt had a yellow-blue map of Ukraine on his chest and the word 'Ukraine' embroidered on its heart. It shows his support for Ukraine. #BorisJohnson #SupportUkraine
Frat boy has just woke up from a 3 day drunk.
Bill DeMayo
He's lost a shitload of weight
Jacquie Kangas
WorldImperative
Sharing his food with a few migrant families?
G. Murphy Donovan
Clowinish jingoism. Good grief.
Omar Ghaffar
The fact that people like Boris Johnson on this page tells you everything wrong with it in one sentence. There's literally nothing more to say.
Worthless!
Tór Vizsla
Ok not gonna lie this dude now looks like he lives in his parent's basement hurling insults across a CoD channel and 4 chan
Michael G. Dorman
Well that about sums up the whole situation. 🤡 🌎
Sri Gawn Tu Fahr
The Truth About the Ukraine / Russia War
400,000 dead Ukrainians
Tucker Carlson
Ep. 18  Into the abyss: Colonel Douglas Macgregor tells us why the Ukraine war must end now.
Konečná Romana
Former. Luckily.
It's a nice shirt. I think 
would benefit from the experience of popping across to Kyiv, et al, soon whilst weather's favourable, to pay old friends a visit, over a beer.
I think it would benefit all involved. Genuinely. And could be fruitfull.
Will
So off BJ
eric_c_anderson
Remember when Bojo ordered Zelensky to scotch the Istanbul negotiations?
Eugene
RT #Deutschland das lederhosen
UnWoke Texan
Gay.
KOSAK 🇺🇦
A true friend of Ukraine
Show replies
Gray 🏴󠁧󠁢󠁳󠁣󠁴󠁿🇩🇰🇿🇦🇪🇺 🇺🇦
Even his pictures are a distortion of the truth
KevinTaylor
Ask him how much Russian money he and his party accepted , and why he installed the son of an ex kgb spy into the house of lords
Shame the only thing embroidered on his heart in selfishness. He was good to Ukraine but for his own sefish reasons.
Paul Byrne
What, no pockets for the cash ? Where will oligarchs know where to put tennis *donations*
Roland Müller 
Boris did a great job regarding UKR politics and had a stout&clear message towards Ruzzia.
Isabelle Legault🇨🇦
Is he responsible for the Brexit?
Boy With Apple
Photoshopped. Next time you see live pics of him, he won't look that slim again. Almost as though he never was..
Wayne Libonati
Stick him on the front line…..
Drew
other than it being boris the shirt looks pretty good .
keepitclean
He’s a criminal though so don’t celebrate him or people might turn on you
Wild rider
Almost the worst British Prime Minister ever, worst being Liz Truss.
Ray Riches Blocked by Mad Nad, Jenkyns & Coffey
Just remember that he is a compulsive liar, a fraudster, a cheat and a national embarrassment.
rothesay blue
Has that been photoshopped? Where have the hams gone?
Suskis
Boris Johnson is ready to use any opportunity to make himself look good
Quite sure Boris isn't wasting away in reality, but great to see him supporting Ukraine as usual 💙❤️
traveler
He is one of the few ones who was 💯  with 🇺🇦 from the very beginning! A real friend of 🇺🇦!
Michelle 
What happened to his gut? Looking pretty slim in that pic.
David Allen
Amd a party sponsored by Russia
Fionna O'Leary, 🕯🇪🇺
That’s been massively photoshopped
Eng. Local Man 🇰🇪
Probably he wants the fight to go on, till Ukraine is no more!
MannekenPisFella
About the only thing he got right, probably by luck and thanks to Ben Wallace.
baquelita
still a backpfeifengesicht if I ever saw one
mynameisdave
He also wears Lebedev like a cheap suit.
DecaVerse
War criminal.
Ed Sheeran in 30 years?
Carla Marques
Boris looks amazing 💙💙💙💙
Her grace, Carol of auld bag.
Poundland Trump
Kevin Hornak
I like that shirt
trevor best
Although BJ wasn't everyone's cup of tea, I liked him, and it's because of moments like these where he doesn't mind sharing his true feelings, also thethe first PM to visit Ukraine during Russia's aggression 🇬🇧🇺🇦
Nice shirt, but ...
NicotineCaféine
Unity through accountability
Good lad!🇬🇧🇺🇦
Clearly a photoshop.
DaddyHells
He trying to look slim
Melissa 🇬🇧🇺🇦
Shawn Stangeland
Would love to have one
Kevin Bleakley
Clowns are known to wear all kinds of things
Michael of the Baltic Order
All that is left of his „legacy“
Unless Boris has lost 40lbs, then that’s not him is it?
the kind of guy you don't want on your side
Keith Pettitt
Buy does it matter what Johnson does anymore?. He's not very important!
UGLY.
The heart is in the center. Not the side.
Perry Milward
Gudonya Boris
Pity he couldn't show a bit of respect while wearing it.
Looking at the waist there, he must have been holding his (ample) belly in. I wonder who gifted it to him - he won’t have spent his own money on it.
Daniel Canning
Where can we get that shirt
We miss you, Boris!
Dan Jeddore
Way to be Boris 👍 #SlavaUkraini
Russian asset.
Johnson was delivered without any heart att all.
All lya
La main droite de la guerre cette pourriture 😡
AuzK MarMenor
photoshopped !
Ahab
Boris made by Lebedev
This man should not be trusted.
Justin Li
Susie Jones
Surprised they make them big enough for old fatty, or was the back cut open?
Guillaume Saquet
Am I the only one to imagine apples on his thumbs ?
dotty
He will be back ,  just s matter of time
Andre Roy
Sanitizing his Russian roots?
NHampshireMatty
Somebody please get him to a barber.
Mateusz Kuligowski
Tuco Ramirez
I need one of these
I want that shirt!
Dude got younger after leaving office?   Lol.
SirVant
Bless
Great shirt for target practice!
Jan Křivan Kdo vítr seje,klidí bouři.
qavit
He's a true friend
Scot
tool
yuri gvozdenko 
fake!! it's ed sheeran
neoman32: I'm Woke because you're Racist!
Trump doesn't do it.
Lost weight, grew a moustache o.O he looks so different!
Martin Lovatt 
Boris Johnson will do anything to promote Boris Johnson
Jānis Jaunslavietis
Woooow, crazy😐
Terri₿lyGood
Rock star! ❤️🫡
Sandy Innes
RoLand Rover
What is he trying to save ? Something's up with his reputation?
Рати Минакши Путина🇮🇳
Jorge Forever
Hero
Betty Boo 
Boris you look amazing 💙💙
Dude got younger after leaving office?   Lol.
SirVant
Great shirt for target practice!
He's a true friend
Scot
tool
fake!! it's ed sheeran
neoman32: I'm Woke because you're Racist!
Trump doesn't do it.
I like this guy!
Lost weight, grew a moustache o.O he looks so different!
Martin Lovatt 
Boris Johnson will do anything to promote Boris Johnson
Woooow, crazy😐
What is he trying to save ? Something's up with his reputation?
Boris you look amazing 💙💙
rugby-bear
Never trust anything this chancer says or does. It's all to make himself look good, he's a complete narcissist.
Who...?
Elementary, Watson
The best part is “former” 🙄
kieran Hogan
Still a plonker
Georgi Alexandrov
I miss Boris as PM, such a great leader
President Goku 🌐
everyone's shitting on Boris, but the dude is one of Ukraine's loudest supporters and deserves credit for it
Filex
He could wear swastika too
he looks like an old ed sheeran
Tinta
He deserves the vyshiwanka
As 🇬🇧 was the first Nation to support
While everyone else was debating/dillydallying over sending weapons
He sent Javelins for starters. 
Javelins (incl Flooding the north) in the hands of 🇺🇦 freed Kyiv, destroyed the 40 mile columns.
that'll be worth a lot to collectors once Ukraine is partitioned
Isn't that Ed Sheeran?
Dawson Bridger
Ed Sheeran looks like hell
For a moment I thought it was Ed Sheeran 🙄
chris harris
Like he cares! 
probably start his car up one day and....😇
He wishes he was that thin!
It can also move to Ukraine, no one would cry.
But he hangs out with Russian intelligence connections and takes donations from Russians. You are welcome to have him.
Still a massive tit.
I guess he starved since he resigned from the prime minister position.
Second comedian politician 😄
Lost some weight too?
Pope Hentai
probably has it on his wallet, too.
What's happened to Johnson's moobs?
Knowing him as we do, it’ll have been paid for with money from his Russian friends and will proclaim his love for Russia all over the back of it… he is a dangerous, dishonest turncoat, manipulative and fickle in equal measure; never to be trusted and not to be listened to…


An industrial revolution without overt, visible pollution/alternatives to coal?
BACKGROUND
Fantasy setting, highly rural/pastoral. Social landscape is significantly more egalitarian (but far from idyllic) with no serfdom tying a peasant class to the land. Magic exists but wizards as a social class are estranged from others and have little interest or incentive to meddle in the affairs of mortals. Technological level is intended to be roughly analogous to the first industrial revolution and the setting is experiencing increased urbanisation and the rise of cities but…
QUESTION
I’m in the early stages of working on a setting for a tabletop campaign and I’ve hit a bit of a snag. As mentioned above I’d intended for the technology level to be that of the first industrial revolution but I’m having some difficulty envisaging how such a thing would succeed in this setting. There’s a number of political forces arrayed against them but I think the tipping point would be the popular outcry against the smog and smoke generated by factories powered by coal. A second, perhaps even more important concern, is that on a meta level I feel having the city inundated with the kinds of pollution London saw would undermine the aesthetic I’m going for. Dark smokestacks belching out ominous black smoke should be reserved for evil wizards making their own little Isengard.
So, I’m at a bit of a loss. I’ve considered moving the technology forward a bit to allow for electrical generators and grids which would get rid of the the visible pollution (for the most part, pushing the power plant away from population centers) and handwaving away the in between steps but I’d feel I’d be stretching credulity if I also wanted to keep the vibe of (mega)cities being a “new thing”. Also, on a very petty note, I’d be losing steam trains and I do enjoy them. Am I overthinking this or is there an obvious solution I’m missing? Is there a way to maintain a bright, clean aesthetic without handwaving things and hoping nobody looks too closely?
Edit 1: A couple of clarifications re: social landscape and scale of city
Edit 2: Available feedback has helped me greatly narrow down my concerns and has been very helpful, thank you all. So, if no pollution is a non-starter, is there an alternate power source that would provide a cleaner aesthetic but fulfill the role of coal in powering engines?
If you take a bright approach in your world and avoid putting the words "pollution" and "ecology", it might be just enough ^^. In other words, don't talk about what you don't want to talk, talk about the themes you wish to explore :). – 
how much do you need to solve it, an alternative power source is possible but a lot of coal burning was for actual heat for smelting, kilning, or glass making – 
@John It's seeming very unlikely I'll be able to avoid widespread pollution (which fair enough, it's a hard ask and one that predates coal). Considering the feedback I should refine the question on how I can avoid overt, visible pollution? Akin to how natural gas is colourless and odourless but still very much a pollutant. Is there another power source that could fill the role of coal without being as visibly polluting? I'll give the question another once over. – 
Industry is not the issue
The first factories were powered by water wheels, not coal; so, you can make your cities a bit cleaner by sticking with this. Ancient Rome for example ground enough grain for over 1 million people using just 12 water mills powered by the water brough in by thier aqueducts. They also had water powered saw mills that they used for mass producing plywood, and there is no telling how many other things they powered with the water they brought into thier city.
That said cities were already nasty, polluted, smoky places LONG before the industrial revolution. The biggest problem is not the coal factories invented a few hundred years ago, it's all the wood burning stoves and fire places that have been around for millennia. If your industrial era city is not a smoky, nasty place, then it's not historically accurate... unless your city has a methane pipe system.
Unlike wood or other fossil fuels, methane burns cleanly into just CO2 and Water with no ashes, tars, or other waste products so there is no visible or smellable smoke. It is also colorless and odorless (without modern additives to give it a smell); so, even if you have some leaking here and there, the pollution will not be apparent either. By 1816, Baltimore installed the first piped methane powered street lamp system and by the 1830s you start to see the first gas stoves being produced; so, this places piped natural gas replacing wood and coal burning well within the bounds of a late industrial era society. The downside of methane is that until very recently, it was only available as a byproduct of the coal industry meaning that many cities that burned methane in homes also burned coal in thier factories. To remedy this, it means you need to place your coal powered factories and such outside of town limits (or sell the coal to those evil polluted cities), and then pipe in the methane byproducts of your coal mining as a fuel for use inside of the city for cooking, heating, and light which will give you relatively clean air in the city itself.
These are all very valid points and thank you for bringing them up. I had such a myopic focus on coal and smokestacks I completely forgot about the awful state of cities before coal ever took center stage! I fear you are quite right in your assessment but I'll leave the question open for a couple more hours to see if anyone wants to take a crack at an alternative power source before I mark this as answered. Once again, thank you for your input! – 
@Grimm edited my answer after you accepted it. Turns out, commercial scale methane production has been around for even longer than I realized making it not anachronistic for an industrial era society... just not necessarily the norm. – 
Indeed, one of the things that powered the industrial revolution were the laboratories that depended on a good supply of quality raw ingredients - coal, coal gas, oil, methane. Many big cities quickly switched to coal gas (or methane) when it became available, and while the coal gas plants themselves weren't exactly clean (there's a lot of stuff in coal), they got better over time. And it was still cleaner than most existing alternatives, it's just that the pollution was more concentrated (city -> cleaner, plant -> dirtier). Of course, the supply increased demand... Dyes exploded with coal – 
There may be a bit of misinformation here.
Those "dark satanic mills" arose almost two centuries after the start of the Industrial Revolution. Industrialization began with waterwheels, and hydropower was the power source which drove the rise of factories for a very long time.
London was not typical, like, at all. The smog of London was mostly due to local climatic conditions and the universal use of bad coal for domestic purposes; factories did play some part, but they were not the dominant factor. For example, Paris, with different geographical conditions, never came close to London with respect to smog and bad air.
Feudalism is by far the most decentralized political system in human history. I am at a loss to imagine anything more decentralized than the High Middle Ages.
Electricity could have been discovered and used at any point in history at least from the classical age onwards. It is a bit of a historical mystery how come we had to wait for the 18th century. They had copper, they had zinc, they had iron, they had acids, they had wire: there was no material element missing.
But what I really don't get is the part about cities being a new thing. Cities are a really really old thing. Cities came five thousand years before the Industrial Revolution. Basically, cities exist to support trade; that's what they are for. Without cities, you cannot have the economic base where an Industrial Revolution can arise.
And about the pollution, you may be overthinking it. You just cannot avoid pollution in the city, not with a pre-21st century technological base; but you do not have to dwell on it.
To give a practical example, one of the most pressing pollution problems which faced 19th century cities was horse manure. London alone had about 150,000 horses towards the end of the 19th century, and each horse produced about 10 kg of manure per day, to say nothing about the smelly liquid waste and the swarms of flies. That's 1,500 tons of manure per day which had to be collected and carted out of the city. On the other hand, have you ever read a historical or fantasy story, or seen a film, where the horse waste problem was shown in its gross magnitude? No. It was carefully placed aside. Nobody wants to read a story or see a film about the problem of collecting and carting a thousand tons of manure per day.
@JaniMiettinen: For example, how important was the king in a feudal kingdom was explained hands-on to King John "Lackland" of England at Runnymede in 1215... For a visual example, look at a map of the Holy Roman Empire in the 13th century: each of those countless colored patches is a state, notionally subordinated to the Emperor but in practice much more independent than a modern member-state of the European Union. – 
@JaniMiettinen: Yes, OK, but those legislative and executive powers belonged to the local baron, not to the state. Medieval states did not have any kind of central government in the modern understanding. Each and every feudal lord was chief justice and chief executive in his or hers lands. Quiz: when did France acquire a uniform legal system? – 
@Nosajimiki: In what way? Athens had a few hundred thousand inhabitants, all obeying the same laws, all subject to the same set of magistrates, etc. Moreover, Athens was the central ruling power over a sizeable empire. Decentralized simply means without a strong center, it does not mean democratic or anarchic. – 
With regards to electricity, until the industrial era, they didn't have wire, at least not in the quantities and lengths needed to make an electric motor. Drawing wire by hand is a slow, labor-intensive process, and most ancient wire was used for jewelry, not tools. – 
You can't avoid pollution: just consider that algae and photosynthetic organisms polluted Earth so much with their waste gas to seclude anaerobic organisms into remote parts of the planet where oxygen can't easily reach.
And algae are far away from anything resembling an industrial revolution.
Getting to something closer to our context, early bronze age people heavily polluted their environment with the wastes of copper mining, increasing the local concentrations of arsenic thanks to the wastes of smelting. And, again, they were far from being an industrial revolution.
You simply can't produce a lot of something without having also a lot of something else in the form of wastes and polluting agents. It's the amount in itself that turns the waste into pollution.
Indeed, the industrial age became rather unprecedented in how much of the waste was further processed into something useful. That might sound weird thinking about modern "waste on purpose" like plastic packaging, fast fashion, stupid cars and disposable everything, but a lot of the industrial revolution was built on extracting every possible thing out of the resources you had. Coal was no longer just burned - it was separated into coke (metallurgy) and coal gas (lighting, heating), used to produce dyes and fertilizers, sulphuric acid... Things got progressively cleaner. – 
Sure, horses could be considered "more natural", but tractors were cleaner (though they brought pollution of a different kind)... and only got cleaner as time went on. Cars were seen as a wonderful thing that finally eliminates the dirty horses out of big cities and bring much cleaner environment... which was true, up until the point where the scale exploded beyond anything horses could ever provide. And scale is the main thing that ultimately made the industrial revolution "dirty" - a huge increase in population (and density), in stuff produced, and unprecedented scale of warfare. – 
If you want a different outcome, you need different motivations
If you assume a capitalism first approach, you should expect similar outcomes to our history. You don't have to assume that capitalists are evil, it's just that they will be more focused on profits and the downsides of pollution will not be changes behavior until it becomes obvious that the downsides are significant, widespread and detrimental.
If on the other hand, the people have widespread honest respect for the environment, and this is truly considered as a first principle, then even those few that don't respect the environment will still take into account environmental impact because the consequences of becoming known as a polluter will be too harsh to ignore.
Even then, if some people think they can get away with it, they will pollute as a shortcut cheap solution to waste disposal. However, the widespread pollution of London or rivers that catch fire should be rare due to a few bad actors.
The short-term economic benefits of simple dumping waste to land, water, or air must be over-powered by the bad karma of doing so. Thus, the compulsion to be clean must be strong.
Many people believe that the culture of the native Americans was such that they were in balance with nature. Though certainly not true in a universal sense, such a culture would be a plausible basis for such an outcome.
The widespread pollution of London had little to do with industry in the first place, though. Which was why people didn't see the factories as such a big deal at first - when people burn coal (and unrefined coal at that) in their fireplaces, and with the massive amounts of horses everywhere, factories that bring jobs and prosperity aren't such a big deal. The pollution from coal-powered factories started being significant as London switched over to coal gas for lighting and heat, which were much cleaner. Other cities tended to avoid coal, but wood burning is still pretty awful. – 
Incidentally, "rivers that catch fire" were caused by those coal-gas plants, which provided the much cleaner environment... they just had a "few" snags along the way. Heck, one of the things that eliminated huge amounts of waste, as weird as it may sound today, was the spread of internal combustion engines - finally, instead of dumping all the waste oil products (oil was used exclusively for the production of kerosene for lighting - a rather small fraction of the raw material), they could be used productively at least. And fewer horses. If people cared about the waste, they wouldn't get there. – 
And as for the popular myths about Native Americans, it would be better if they had any basis in truth at all :D It's even thought that the massive die-off of the native population (in Europe too, of course) was one of the causes of the Little Ice Age, as people stopped burning so much wood and much land returned to wilderness, sequestering humongous amounts of carbon dioxide. There's no evidence pointing to Native Americans being any different from Europeans in that regard; most of the popular culture is either long past European colonization or outright invented out of thin air. – 
I suggest that you postulate different sources of fuel.
For example, if there was a unique species of ballon tree that grows over coal deposits or swamps and extracts methane chemically from the coal or decay via the root system. This would form havestable sources of methane for your world.
As another example, your world could be rich in magnetite for some reason, and the prevalence of magnetic sources led to the discovery of electricity as a power source before coal. Turbines could be water, wind, or animal driven.
If there was some cautionary tale in the recent history of your world which led to a civilization-wide adoption of environmental responsibility "lest that tragedy repeat" could also help reduce the impact of industrialization.
Several other answers have briefly mentioned methane. Perhaps your world's industrial revolution is centered around farming and breeding microorganisms that turn farm waste or other organic materials into methane fuel; this would also clean up the natural smoke and dirt of a city that burns wood or charcoal for its fuel. (Smoke from indoor fires is a significant cause of health issues in pre-industrial or partly industrialized urbanized societies, even if the fuel is wood or dung.)
This science article for kids has a good overview of biological (anaerobic decay microorganisms, cattle farts, ) and non-biological (mostly volcanoes) sources of the methane in our environment, though you could make your planet be a bit different: https://kids.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frym.2019.00133
This rather technical article discusses some of the ways that methanogenic archaea can be, and are being, used to generate methane which is burned for electricity and or purified and compressed into transportation fuel: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7289024/
The biggest issue here is how to trigger initial uptake of these technologies. We learned to burn coal to smelt iron because there were places in the world where small coal and iron deposits were close to or at the surface, and easy to access; only once the technology was proven at that level did we start mining more inaccessible deposits at the scale needed to drive a full scale technological society. One possible scenario would be clay deposits in bogs, where people learned to use the methane from the peat bogs to fire clay objects on the spot.
This article talks about how some bogs have a clay layer underneath them and others do not, though it is mostly focused on using bogs to grow cranberries: https://www.cranberries.org/exploringcranberries/into/beneath_back.html
Hopefully this gives you some ideas to start from.
TL;DR: Venice + Iceland for the win!
Other answers have mentioned the two main sources of pollution in a London-like city at the start of the Industrial Revolution: coal/wood burnt to in houses, and horse manure.
Iceland: cleaner energy source
Burning coal or wood happens for two reasons: heating and cooking.
You can mostly eliminate heating needs by relocating to a hotter area year long, and the little coal or wood used for cooking should not be much of an issue provided there's enough wind to disperse it.
If you do not wish to go for a more "tropical" climate, however, another solution is a land with plenty of hot water underground that you can tap into. By redirected this hot water into houses, you solve the heating issue. There are villages, in France, where houses have used floor heating for a very long time, by piping naturally hot water into the floors; it really cuts on the heating bill.
If the water is hot enough -- as in, scalding hot, or above 70C -- it will be free of any bacteria, and may thus be used as is for cooking.
Given that Romans were building aqueducts and sewers in the Antiquity, an early Industrial Revolution society clear has all the technical know-how to pipe hot water from the ground. And should hot water NOT be universally available, it would explain why the city sprang up here, and not anywhere else: it's a prime spot to survive cold, harsh winters.
Venice: cleaner transportation
You can eliminate a lot of horse manure issues by switching from land-based to canal-based transportation. A horse (or other) is nigh required to pull a cart because the cart is so heavy, however the same load can be transported by boat fairly easily -- especially in the absence of current.
A city ala Venice (or Amsterdam, or Copenhagen) with an array of canals criss-crossing it would be more likely to rely on boat transportation than horse-drawn transportation, at least within city limits.
Combination
Combining the two will require a specific geographic location.
Thermal "hot spots" are most likely found in mountainous areas, so the city would likely be in the mountains -- though it may be close to the bottom on the nearby plain.
Canals require a plain, and likely a slightly "spongy" one (marshlands), close to a source of water -- be it river or sea.
A city combining thermal "hot spots" and canals would thus likely be located close to either river or sea, in a flat "marshland" area, with hot water being piped from nearby mountains.



Elon Musk
I love their new logo
Steve McGuire
They’re on a roll lately…
Elon Musk
Hard to tell the difference between real press and parody these days
Show replies
IDGAF
BasedReplyBot
🗿 Based Bot 🗿
Automated
Kage Spatz
Thanks for clearing that up
Global Index
Major Public/Govt funded broadcaster by country 📺:
🇬🇧 BBC
🇺🇲 NPR
🇯🇵 NHK
🇨🇦 CBC
🇦🇺 ABC
🇹🇷 TRT
🇮🇳 Doordarshan
🇵🇰 PTV
🇷🇺 RT
🇰🇷 KBS
🇨🇳 CCTV
🇶🇦 Al Jazeera
🇮🇱 IPBC
🇩🇪 ARD
🇧🇷 TV Brazil
🇿🇦 SABC
🇲🇾 RTM
🇮🇷 IRIB
🇮🇩 RRI
🇸🇬 Mediacorp
Animal Press
Apple doesn’t fall far from the tree 🌲🤦‍♂️😂
Adam Lowisz
Austin
That can’t be real
Show replies
Daily Inspiration
Coolest video ever!
Then and Now
Not as cool as my man here 😂
Elon Musk (Parody)
We should buy them out and turn them into a Full Time Meme Network.
Only post memes using their platform.
It will likely provide more value for the world. 
We need laughs not lies.
We should buy them out and turn them into a Full Time Meme Network.
Only post memes using their platform.
It will likely provide more value for the world. 
We need laughs not lies.
Kenneth_TCG
If this happens, bro, I promise I'll create memes 24/7.
WildBillNC🇺🇸
Donna Marie
CryptoCatmark
NaeNaeKitty.ETH
Osaro
Mahesh Bhavsar
Leadership is not about size....
OPhommachanh
Life is like a box of Danish butter cookies
Ultra Grateful Calvin 🇺🇸🐶🏒 🎶
shoveitjack
You've got your own house to clean up. 
Start by firing Linda and anyone else who believes X has to police "safe" speech or "misinformation."
Quadcarl
That’s all.
Quadcarl
this you bro? 👇
Looks pretty similar to the old one, eh?
Jeremy Specials
Yup.. They are now really showing what they are!
Karl Miraflores Borromeo
screenshot this.
Pikaso
Here's your screenshot.
⚡ Want to automatically post your tweets on Instagram? Visit https://pikaso.me.
Lil Auntie
Love it!!!
Paul Hookem 🇺🇸
Máximo Teves
I love X
Nino Brodin
You’re behaving like a vulgar bully against freedom and democracy here
StillLivinginthewoods
Democracy will always devolve into a tyranny of the majority. Freedom can never survive in a democracy.
That is why the Founding Fathers were wise to make sure this nation isn't one.
The Constitution is the law of the land, not the whims of the masses.
Show replies
ALicE WOnDeRLaND ... CBK...
LiKE  ThiS  LoGo  BeTTeR 💥TeSLA💥 MiDNigHT RiDeR💥💥💥...
PetX Designer
PetX Designer
i love you all... can you give me a like?
I think the 
TheBabylonBee is actually more factual….and the NYT funnier.  The Bee is spot on.
GrimsMemes
The bee is mostly predictive and has a better results than Jeanne Dixon could ever hope for
NaeNaeKitty.ETH
Then and Now
Talking about working that 🔥
Crypoq Giveaway
Assnani
Sometimes you post Silly things too
This Tweet is unavailable. Learn more
The earth is massive we’re not gona run out of space
The Alts Street
WOKE
blank
shitpostblank
woke times and they still asleep
Chamath Palihapitiya's burner (parody)
They’re more ridiculous than ever
Suburban Black Man 🇺🇸
niceblackdude
The New Woke Times
Woke Street Journal
Wokington Post
Tonya de Vitti
CodeCypher
$MLC too,  it looks great 👍
Show replies
Lyrics Like
Misha Fitton 🐢 🎨
I need something better to read.
A joke being checked by the Community notes…
Coxstore 
Memories 💞
If you feel that there is a lot of trouble in your life then see this....
TMajestic 🦋
All you're doing is stoking more division. Try reading the comments and you'll see it.  Sad times.
Jake
Its important to also call out Fox News too 
  You know they can be shady too on the opposite side
kingdomite | 💡✍️
Ayokingdomite
This is crazy
I love it more on this background!
Quadcarl
Hey 
Alan Myron : E Pluribus Unum 🌺
Everybody prefers to be what they already are.
My Fav. 🇮🇳
One Click Crypto
Liberty Lyss
Perfect 🤌
This sums up the people that read the New York Times
Angela Belcamino
X is the only news you need.
mike durrett
Sound like an accurate name. Meanwhile at the lab😉🤣
that's racist.
Ɖusk
Community notes rn:
We have almost left To watch TV and press media..
X is best way to get news feed.. 👍
Brent Nally
U go woke u go broke
screenshot this
Pikaso
Here's your screenshot.
⚡ Want to automatically post your tweets on Instagram? Visit https://pikaso.me.
Oscar Bonilla
Blessme Hoky 
Their byline at the Times:
All the woke that we tell you to repeat
ExtraSpiceAni💭
Someone back home isn’t liking it
Amit
Ðoge~Panda
Gonna have to change the name on this tombstone 🤣🤣🤣
Joelliuzzi#metaversearmy
Pretty cool for sure I’m digging the $BAD logo myself
PickensBurgh🫡 (Tino)
Elon thank you for making this platform so great
Infringer
Been this way for a long time…
houseperu
a New York Times reporter 👀
From 
houseperu
🅰🅼🅴🆁🅸🅲🅰 🆁🅴🅰🅻
another woke.. joke.. posing as "journalism"
Divyansh Gupta
 screenshot this
Pikaso
Here's your screenshot.
⚡ Want to automatically post your tweets on Instagram? Visit https://pikaso.me.
Come back to Allah 🩵
I still do not understand why being “awake” is such a bad thing. I guess sleep/sheep are easier to manage… but how does that move us forward?
Big Rolly💸
heisrolly_
For real
Me to
PhotographicFloridian
Some people should not be writing Community Notes
HOUmanitarian ™
Not as good as your new logo, Elon.
I Love the new like Button In X 
Love this no one else would dare 😂
Thought Crimez
🤔 Have you been watching our show? #thoughtcrimez
your new moderation policies are no less woke than the nyt
Jeremy Specials
Nah. They are working on it
Elon cooking so early 🔥
Optimus (parody)
Are there any mainstream media outlets that are still good?
cvendo
Like if messi is the goat.
Looks great. Have you seen the new $PEPE? It's trending, and it's going to be the next big #meme
King Degen👑
Hope they publish about my social anxiety to go to my local woke barista
Omwamba 🇰🇪
The Reverse is TRUE 🤣
Same.  Did you see The Guardian’s!?
ℂ𝕣𝕪𝕡𝕥𝕠𝔼𝕞𝕡𝕣𝕖𝕤𝕤.𝔼𝕋ℍ🤍
I’m woken now!!
Thanks to the X
ɪ.ɢ ᴋᴀɢᴀʀᴀ
What about this X logo
Satyam Patel | 𝕏...
Benjamin🏊🏻‍♀️Boyce
How is X gonna be any different?
TWB
Ow! The graphic design! It hurts.
Concept OK though.
Robert J. Thomas
Very funny!
Liberacrat™️
Time to update their logo to the new one! 👇💯
DEATH NOTE font...!
Rich Holland
We always referred to them as the “Treason Times”!
Top Tech Investments
Let's just start an anti-woke movement
Ariel Ortiz
🗿 Based Bot 🗿
Automated
Ah, look at that. What wonders will the "New Woke Times" bring us next? Unicorns are now recognized as a new gender? Chicken can consent? Stay tuned for more enlightening revelations.
me too
Jesus👾
So much 😂😎 Gm from X
Thomas Sowell, The Genius of...
"All the News that Fits the Narrative We Print"
Kevin Freeman
This fits the content much better!
Andy Shepheard
Oh geeze...lol
Debra Palmer
You're so funny. I do like your humor.
Justin Zhang
What about the content? I also like the content.
Steven Steele
I’m a big fan of all their articles about white people.
The Broke Times
Abdullahi Umar Zarma🇳🇬
The New Work times
Fits perfectly.
Faheem ZAFAR
I love this logo
Templemont
Ironic isn’t it? Looks like Old Type Font. 😏
Jesus is my Rock
You got that right Elon
Philipp | Mind Changer
Squirrels of USF
Squirrel times sounds better to me
XRPcryptowolf
#XRP’s logo looks so much better 😂
pia abbott
Yea… I don’t love your new logo
Sean.crypto🇮🇹🇺🇸
Lol 😂 nice
Mika
go off Elon
Zachamoto12
The New Woke Times
Jacquelyn Sapphire
putting it mildly are we....
Men will be men
Gonna change for X?
Manuel Avendaño
Lol take a look at my new profile header, it all makes sense now. 😎
Omkhar Setty
Stopped visiting any bews websites. X is the place..
Show replies
punished duke
Meme Right Politics
Good one!
Devin Hernandez
MEHBOOB GUJJAR
The
New 
Woke 
Time
xSupreme
interesting, how much did it cost?🤨😂
🆂🅰🅻🆄𝕏cogitatoris
Oh dear….
Chad Martin
How’s my genius doing today?  Onward & upward Mr. Musk Sir 👍
Like the cover of an album.
rapidtronics
Yessss 😅😅😂
I miss our old logo
Burnasso
I love their new logo
Queen Bee
How has it become this
Véronique Henry
eddie apodaca
SocalSnowboard
Ahhh, I see what you did there
Hoang Phuc
I love it
Dami_Nuga
I love it too❤
Epic Memes From Millennial Dreams
Based
G Chaudhry
Lol 😂
Amy
smeedycat
I used to call it The New left Times but yes that's better.
Marguerite
Millennials are woke
Norno. 🇺🇸 🇺🇸 🇺🇸
AlamoPong
“Anything that’s fit to obfuscate”
Amie Singer
SCOTT E SHUMATE
miseremea
Mario Hinsche 🇨🇦🇺🇸
fastfordclub
Sai Mohan 'NTR'
New 
Like Button 👌💥. Like & See The Surprise 🤯.
Buy it
Charis Tsevis
tsevis
We all hate the new Twitter logo.
Tessa S.
TessaMurinko
Lol! Fits


















































