China’s Economic Outlook: Pep Talks Up Top, Gloom on the Ground
Beijing has characterized concerns about the economic slowdown as being inflated by Western critics. Widespread anxiety and pessimism paint a different picture.

Share full article

Several pedestrians cross a street in front of a large screen displaying stock exchange data. 
China halved the tax on stock transactions in an attempt to increase investor confidence. But many people are unwilling to buy stocks in the first place, an expert said.Credit...Alex Plavevski/EPA, via Shutterstock

Vivian Wang
By Vivian Wang
Reporting from Shanghai
Sign up for The Interpreter newsletter, for Times subscribers only.  Original analysis on the week’s biggest global stories, from columnist Amanda Taub. Get it with a Times subscription.
To the residents and business owners of Chedun, a working-class neighborhood in the southwestern outskirts of Shanghai, the signs of an anemic economy are all around. The factories that once drew workers from around the country have moved away. Those that remain have slashed wages. Around the affordable eateries and motley shops where workers once crowded, employees eagerly latch onto anyone passing by.

“No one has money now, it’s obvious,” Cherry Qian, 25, said as she sat inside the electronics store she manages, which on Sunday afternoon had seen only one customer.

But there’s one place the downturn isn’t as obvious: in the government’s account of it.

A gulf has emerged between the Chinese economy as many Chinese are experiencing it, and Beijing’s narrative of it — and that gulf is only widening. For many ordinary Chinese, one of the worst economic slowdowns the country has faced in decades has translated into widespread pessimism and resignation. But state media and officials continue to declare that any challenges are blips.

Concerns about the economy, propaganda outlets have insisted, have been inflated by Western politicians and media outlets engaged in “cognitive warfare.” One social media account backed by China’s state broadcaster released a video that purported to investigate how foreign news outlets had cherry-picked statistics that predicted higher economic growth, just so they could later say China fell short. “At the end of the day, they are fated to be slapped in the face by reality,” a spokesman for China’s foreign ministry said this month about the purported Western naysayers.
A woman puts two boxes into a blue shopping cart, while standing before a row of refrigerated items
Shopping at a supermarket in Beijing this month. Food prices are falling, as consumption drags.Credit...Pedro Pardo/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
When the reality has proved too inconvenient, another approach has simply been to conceal it, as when Beijing this month stopped publishing the youth unemployment rate, which had been at a record high. The decision was widely mocked by Chinese social media users, who joked that the government had finally landed on an effective fix.
Differing official and on-the-ground narratives are hardly new in China, with its tightly controlled censorship apparatus. But the contrast is especially stark now, when the public’s gloom is so widespread, from the wealthy elite to factory workers.
A housing crisis has left many middle-class Chinese who poured their life savings into apartments reeling. Government crackdowns on various white-collar sectors, from education to technology, have spurred layoffs at major corporations. Foreign companies have pulled back from investments in China, leading to less work for factories, plunging paychecks for workers and falling consumer demand.
“I tried many times and just couldn’t find one I wanted,” Zhu Xunyang, 19, said of his search for a summer job at a factory in Chedun while home from university. Either the salary was too low, or the factories didn’t want him, he said.
Netflix Says You Can Keep Their DVDs (and Request More, Too)
Putting All My Eggs in the Boyfriend Basket
Jacobite Hero Bonnie Prince Charlie Gets a Fresh Face, Acne and All
“So I kind of wanted to just give up,” he said as he played games on his phone in the metalware shop his parents run. “And I did.”
Many skeptical or outright scornful comments about the economy on social media have escaped the censors, perhaps because they are so common.
A large crowd of young people waits in front of several tables of recruiters.
University graduates attending a job fair in Wuhan, China, in August. This month, Beijing stopped publishing the youth unemployment rate, which had been at a record high.Credit...Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
“That sense of insecurity is almost universally shared within China now, across all walks of life,” said Chen Zhiwu, a professor of finance at the University of Hong Kong. “And that is why the government has been using all the official media and all other tools to convey a positive, optimistic message.”
The malaise is especially striking compared to the optimism many Chinese felt earlier this year, after Beijing finally abandoned coronavirus restrictions that for three years had left many people unable to leave home and unwilling to spend.
Ms. Qian, the electronics store manager, had hoped to buy a new car before her wedding later this year. But after seeing how business had flagged — she saw around 20 customers a day last year, she said — she abandoned that idea.
“It’s to prevent risk,” she said. “Before, you could buy a house as an investment. Now, nobody dares buy a house, or to casually buy anything big.”
A few blocks away, Zhang Jiaojuan and her husband were wondering whether people would venture to buy anything small, either, as they mixed chives and meat for orders that had yet to materialize at their dumpling store.
A close-up of the balconies of a beige apartment building
A residential block in Nantong, China. A housing crisis has left many middle-class Chinese who poured their life savings into apartments reeling. Credit...Qilai Shen for The New York Times
They had not planned to be entrepreneurs: Last year, they worked at an auto parts factory, earning between $800 and $1,000 a month, about the average per capita income in Shanghai. But this spring, wages fell to about $550, so low that the couple decided they might as well try to start their own business. They invested their life savings of about $27,000, thinking of the lively crowds that had filled the cramped storefronts hawking noodles, spicy duck necks and roast meat in the prepandemic years.
“And then we found out business is bad here, too,” said Ms. Zhang’s husband, who gave only his surname, Xue.
“People don’t spend money like they did before the pandemic, where they’d buy whatever they want,” Ms. Zhang said, as their teenage son slouched at one of the empty tables, playing with his phone.
They had cut back on their own spending, too. Mr. Xue said he had essentially stopped buying fruit, limiting himself to staples and vegetables. “We thought if we just got through those three years, and worked hard, there would definitely be hope,” he said. “And then it turned out that when the pandemic ended, things just got worse.”
Officials have acknowledged that the economy is facing new challenges, describing the recovery as “wavelike” while maintaining that the overall outlook is positive. But the remedies they have offered are unlikely to be effective, economists said.
Despite urging consumers to spend more, the government has rejected the idea of cash handouts to households, calling it too costly. It has brandished tax incentives for purchases of new homes, even as it has continued to erode the already weak social safety net that makes many Chinese leery of big purchases.
A Dior storefront with mannequins and handbags on display
The wealthy have continued to spend on luxury goods, but many Chinese have stopped spending on big-ticket items.Credit...Qilai Shen for The New York Times
On Monday, the Ministry of Finance halved the tax on stock transactions, in an attempt to boost investor confidence. But that would not remedy how unwilling people are to buy stocks in the first place, given a lack of faith that they would grow in value, said Professor Chen: “When the future is so uncertain, then it does not matter what kind of transaction costs you charge.”
“Detachment” between the top leadership and the reality of many Chinese, he added, “is clearly there.”
The government’s blame of external forces for the slowdown does have supporters. Wang Ainian, a barber in Chedun, pointed to news reports about the trade war with the United States and Japanese restrictions on the export of computing chips, when asked why business had slowed at local factories.
The economic pain has also been spread unevenly across the country. The wealthy, more insulated from uncertainties, continue to spend on luxury goods. Many malls and train stations are bustling again, though most shoppers and travelers are spending less and choosing cheaper destinations. Among some lower-income Chinese, familiarity with hardship has also blunted the pessimism of the recent downturn.
A man leans on a motorbike for food delivery outside a brightly lit restaurant
Some Chinese have cut back on dining out and other expenses amid the economic uncertainty.Credit...Greg Baker/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
But even for Mr. Wang, no matter who is responsible for the economic pain, he had little hope that it would reverse itself soon. He was seeing only about two-thirds of the customers that he had the year before, and half of prepandemic levels. And that was in a world-class city like Shanghai, not his hometown in inland Anhui Province.
“Shanghai is a place people dream of, and the population was always growing,” he said of Chedun. “But now it’s not.”
For others, the official explanations hardly register. A few blocks away, a 33-year-old clothing shop owner who gave her surname, Tang, said she did not pay attention to news about the economy. But she did spend a lot of time on Xiaohongshu, a Chinese social media platform similar to Instagram, where she tried to collect business tips from other clothing store owners. Most of the posts from them, though, were lamenting how bad their own business was.
Li You contributed research from Shanghai and Siyi Zhao from Seoul.
Vivian Wang is a China correspondent based in Beijing, where she writes about how the country's global rise and ambitions are shaping the daily lives of its people. More about Vivian Wang



Biden administration names 10 prescription drugs for price negotiations
By Amy Goldstein and Daniel Gilbert
Drug price negotiations between Medicare and manufacturers were a significant element in last year’s Inflation Reduction Act. (Michael S. Williamson/The Washington Post)
The Biden administration Tuesday identified 10 expensive prescription drugs that will be included in price negotiations with pharmaceutical manufacturers as the government seeks to ease the financial burden on older and disabled Americans, an unprecedented step in a long political war over the nation’s exorbitant drug costs.
Half of these first drugs chosen for price negotiations are medications used to prevent blood clots and treat diabetes and were taken by millions of people on Medicare in the past year, according to a list released by federal health officials who oversee Medicare, the vast public health insurance system. Others are used to treat heart trouble, autoimmune disease and cancer. Consumers will not see benefits swiftly, with the lower, negotiated prices due to become available in early 2026.
The top three of the 10 drugs on the widely anticipated list include Eliquis, a blood thinner; Jardiance, which treats diabetes and heart failure; and Xarelto, another blood thinner. They cost Medicare $16 billion, $7 billion and $6 billion respectively in the past year.
Medications could be targeted for price negotiation if they are available under Medicare drug benefits, lack certain competition to push down their prices and have been sold for at least several years to give drugmakers time to help recoup the expense of developing them.
Tuesday’s step toward reducing Medicare drug prices was a significant element in last year’s Inflation Reduction Act, a law that President Biden and his aides herald as a policy victory, even though the number of medications and the timing of the first price reductions — 2026 — are less ambitious than some Democrats had sought for many years. And the fate of the entire negotiation plan rests with the courts because six drug manufacturers, the Chamber of Commerce and the pharmaceutical industry’s main trade group have lodged separate lawsuits around the country trying to block it.
Still, the Biden administration, Democratic allies in Congress and consumer health-care advocates portrayed this initial list of 10 drugs as a milestone to shore up the financial stability of the Medicare system and ease the burden on its beneficiaries. Medicare is a federal insurance system for people who are at least 65, along with younger adults who have disabilities. When last year’s law passed, the Congressional Budget Office predicted the negotiations would save the program slightly more than $100 billion during the following decade.
“There is no reason why Americans should be forced to pay more than any developed nation for life-saving prescriptions just to pad Big Pharma’s pockets,” Biden said in a statement issued by the White House, reflecting his intention to use the issue as a feature of his campaign for reelection.
More than 60 percent of the 65 million people on Medicare take prescription medication, and 25 percent take at least four prescriptions, according to a survey this summer by KFF, a health-care policy organization.
The rest of the list consists of Januvia, Farxiga and NovoLog, which treat diabetes among other conditions; Enbrel and Stelara, for arthritis and psoriasis; and Entresto, for heart failure; and Imbruvica, for cancers of the blood.
Wall Street analysts widely expected that most of the 10 drugs selected for price negotiations would appear on the list, based on Medicare expenditures and their sales in the United States, among other criteria. For seniors enrolled in Medicare, their average, annual out-of-pocket costs ranged from $121 for diabetes drug NovoLog to $5,247 for cancer-drug Imbruvica, including those with financial assistance. All told, HHS estimates that about 9 million seniors enrolled in Medicare’s prescription drug program used one or more of the 10 drugs in 2022, and paid a total of $3.4 billion out of pocket.
The 10 drugs identified Tuesday represent the first wave of medicines destined for price negotiation, with the roster expanding in future years. For this initial batch, manufacturers have until the start of October to agree to price negotiation with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. If they do, the companies will quickly need to disclose an array of data to CMS for each selected drug regarding revenue and what the manufacturer spent to research, develop and produce it.
If a manufacturer refuses to negotiate or won’t agree to what federal rules call a “maximum fair price,” the company will face a substantial tax or must withdraw from Medicare and Medicaid, the nation’s largest public health insurance program designed for people with low incomes.
To be considered for the price negotiation, a drug must have no competition from a less expensive generic competitor, and a biologic — a category of drugs made from living organisms — must not compete with any cheaper version known as biosimilars. The number of drugs involved will expand slightly during the next two years, with a total of 15 each of the next two years and 20 drugs in following years. This year and next, the drugs are part of Medicare’s Part D, the program’s drug insurance created two decades ago. After that, the drugs can come from Part D or from Part B, such as cancer therapies, which are administered by doctors.
Senior health administration officials, briefing reporters early Tuesday and speaking on the condition of anonymity before a speech by the president, said CMS started with nearly 7,500 prescription drugs that are covered through Part D. They then whittled the possibilities to 50 that don’t have much competition and that result in the highest costs to Medicare, including drugs that were approved by the Food and Drug Administration at least seven years ago and biologics approved at least 11 years ago. A few other criteria were used, too. From there, CMS ranked the 50, choosing the 10 with the highest costs to the program.
Limited though it is, the arrival of Medicare drug price negotiation is a sharp break from Medicare’s history. When the program was created in the 1960s, it covered drugs that were administered in a doctor’s office — Part B — but excluded medications that patients took on their own. Despite efforts over the decades to add outpatient drug benefits, they were woven into larger health-reform proposals that failed, and the broader drug benefits did not become part of the program until a set of Medicare changes adopted by Congress in 2003. To win Republican support, that statute included language that prohibited any role for the government to negotiate medication prices. The 2022 Inflation Reduction Act — known as IRA — rescinded the prohibition.
Since the outpatient drug benefits embedded in the 2003 law began three years later, Medicare beneficiaries have been able to get that coverage by buying a separate drug plan — through Part D — or as part of managed-care plans, known as Medicare Advantage. Either way, beneficiaries still pay some of the cost of getting the medicines, and the government has not influenced the prices that pharmaceutical companies set.
The push for price negotiation faced intense opposition from pharmaceutical companies, which contend that capping potential earning erodes their ability to invest in further research and development. After a rare loss on Capitol Hill, the industry and its business allies have turned to the courts, with the eight cases that could take years to resolve and could land before the Supreme Court.
If the negotiation process stands, industry analysts predict it will have profound ripple effect. Prices negotiated and made public by Medicare could affect negotiations between commercial insurers and drugmakers. In turn, pharmaceutical companies could focus on developing larger-molecule drugs — such as vaccines and gene therapies — that are exempted from potential Medicare price negotiations for a longer period than prescription pills.
The ultimate impacts of the law are hard to predict. Even companies critical of it acknowledge they could benefit from provisions that make their medications more affordable to patients.
“The IRA law is not all gloom and doom for biopharma, since it will reduce seniors’ out-of-pocket” costs, motivating patients to stay on them longer, according to analysts at Leerink Partners, a health care-focused investment bank. And some drugs designated for negotiation at first might not remain on the list for long, because they are scheduled to lose their patent protection soon after the lower prices take effect, meaning they would have competition and no longer be eligible for the negotiated prices.
For the Biden administration, the Inflation Reduction Act provision is a centerpiece of a battle to curb drug prices that it is waging on several fronts.
Under the law, Medicare beneficiaries pay a limit of $35 a month for insulin. Biden issued an executive order last year directing the Department of Health and Human Services to study new models to lower drug costs for Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries. In May, HHS proposed a rule that would give the department and states more leverage to negotiate payment for the most expensive drugs covered by Medicaid. And the Federal Trade Commission has taken a more aggressive approach to pharmaceutical mergers, citing concerns about price increases when it filed suit in May to block Amgen from acquiring Horizon Therapeutics — even though the two companies don’t directly compete.
Because the impact of the Medicare drug price provision will unfold over years, the negotiated prices may have a minimal effect on some drugs, including Eliquis, a blood-thinning medication that cost Medicare $6.2 billion in 2021, by far the most of any drug. Eliquis, made by Bristol Myers Squibb and Pfizer, is set to lose patent protection in 2026, the year that Medicare’s negotiated prices first takes effect.
“Whatever the impact is will not be long lasting on our portfolio,” Angela Hwang, Pfizer’s chief commercial officer, said of Eliquis in a call with financial analysts this month, according to a transcript compiled by S&P Global Market Intelligence.
Johnson & Johnson — with three drugs on the list, the most of any drugmaker — was less conciliatory. “The IRA’s policies put an artificial deadline on innovation, threatening intellectual property protections and shortening the timeframe to deepen our understanding of patients’ unmet medical needs,” the company said in a statement Tuesday.
Bristol-Myers Squibb said in a statement Tuesday that Eliquis “was targeted for this program due to the sheer number of Medicare patients who benefit from the medicine, not its price.”

What our post-debate poll means for DeSantis, Ramaswamy and Haley
Analysis by Aaron Blake
From left, former vice president Mike Pence, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and former South Carolina governor Nikki Haley, right, listen as Vivek Ramaswamy speaks during Wednesday night's Republican presidential debate. (Joshua Lott/The Washington Post)
Twenty-nine percent of Republican primary voters who watched Wednesday’s debate said that Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis won, while 26 percent said the same of businessman Vivek Ramaswamy, according to a new poll from The Washington Post, FiveThirtyEight and Ipsos. Former South Carolina governor Nikki Haley came in third, at 15 percent.
DeSantis’s political operation responded, as expected, by hyping its candidate as the “winner.” Ramaswamy’s share also suggests he will be a force in the presidential primary race ahead.
But in context, their showings are a bit less impressive. And the actual impact on the race is probably larger for Haley.
The first thing to remember is that polling on debates often reflects people’s preconceived notions about the candidates. You already like DeSantis? You’re predisposed to believe your guy won. That’s perhaps less the case in primary debates, where polarization isn’t as large a factor, but the rule still applies.
Donald Trump is the clear front-runner ahead of the primaries, but he didn’t participate in the debate. DeSantis is pulling more than one-third of the non-Trump vote in the FiveThirtyEight national polling average, Ramaswamy about one-quarter. This means that DeSantis draws a larger percentage of the non-Trump vote in the national polling average than he did among debate watchers who deemed him the victor. Ramaswamy’s numbers are about the same for both metrics.
If there’s one candidate who overperformed by this measure, it’s Haley. She’s taking only about 8 percent of the non-Trump vote in the national polling average, but nearly double that number say she won the debate.
So who are the people who say these candidates won? And did the candidates expand their appeal? Those might be the more interesting questions.
For DeSantis, the group saying he won was largely made up of people who already said they were considering him, at 87 percent. Just 10 percent of people who had not previously considered DeSantis said he won.
Ramaswamy and Haley impressed more voters for whom they hadn’t been on the radar. Ramaswamy was deemed the winner by 28 percent of those not previously considering him, while Haley took 37 percent among those who hadn’t considered her before Wednesday night.
That’s likely in part because voters were less familiar with Ramaswamy and Haley, but it suggests that those candidates might be expanding their appeal more than DeSantis is.
Ramaswamy’s showing also comes with some sizable asterisks.
While he clearly appealed to many watchers, he also polarized people. His favorable rating increased among debate watchers by 10 points (from 50 percent before to 60 percent after); his unfavorable rating increased by 19 points (from 13 percent before to 32 percent after).
As for who those voters were? Ramaswamy’s favorable and unfavorable increases were largely across the board. But there were some differences.
One of his biggest unfavorable increases came among women; while his favorable rating rose by 10 percent among them, his unfavorable rating rose by 25 points.
Ramaswamy, who has made a point to defend Trump and has offered a Trumpian vision for the country, also seemed to turn off Trump skeptics in the GOP. Among those not considering voting for Trump, his favorable rating stayed the same, but his unfavorable rating jumped by 33 points.
Haley’s numbers might be the most significant, and not just because she overperformed her standing in the polls. The data suggest the former United Nations ambassador, who tried to give her party some tough love on Wednesday night, won the battle over the Trump skeptics in the party.
Haley was the winner according to just 8 percent of those who said they were considering voting for Trump, but 33 percent of those who weren’t considering Trump. In the latter, Trump-skeptic demographic, she significantly outpaced two others with a potential claim to those voters — former New Jersey governor Chris Christie (11 percent) and former vice president Mike Pence (7 percent).
Haley’s favorable ratings increased by double digits basically across the board. But her biggest increases were with women (19 percent), those who rely more on the mainstream media than Fox News and conservative media (30 percent), nonconservatives (21 percent) and those not considering Trump (24 percent).
So in the end, Haley probably expanded her appeal the most, but she did so among a section of the party that isn’t particularly large. The challenge for her would be solidifying herself as the candidate of that wing of the party while still maintaining some appeal to the Trump contingent — which neither Christie nor Pence has managed to do.
Ramaswamy, meanwhile, apparently cost himself a broader base of appeal with his very forceful debate performance. But his path to relevance is clearly through the populist, Trumpian wing of the party, and he likely did himself some good there.
We might expect both to rise in the polls more than DeSantis. But we shouldn’t really expect the race to be significantly recast — in large part because all of these candidates are battling for the less than 50 percent of voters who aren’t already on the Trump train.
Emily Guskin contributed to this report.



The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
Superstonk -  Jerome "Man On Fire" Powell, Chair of the Federal Reserve of the United States
Jerome "Man On Fire" Powell, Chair of the Federal Reserve of the United States
By Peruvian_🐂 with regarded adaptationz by 👉🐒👈 there is no TL;dr or ELIA.

For the last few decades, houselessness has been on the rise in virtually every major American city. Drug addiction and mental health issues are of course the driving factors. Below is a graph of the amount of houseless using shelters in New York. We can see spikes in the late 1980s due to the crack scourge, but the rate stabilized until the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. Due to deflationary forces rippling through our economy, mass layoffs and home evictions, millions of people across the States lost their housing and became desperate.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
The Fed (🐒 Federal Reserve) responded to the housing bust with a massive influx of cash into mortgage backed securities. Cumulatively, since 2008, the Fed owns more than $2.6T of MBS (🐒 Mortgage Backed Securities). This caused massive asset price inflation in the housing market and led to enormous wealth gains for those who owned real estate- but those who did not, or lost their homes in the bust, now saw skyrocketing home values but did not have any equivalent jump in income to compensate. This caused what is called "economic despair", similar to the opioid crisis tormenting midwestern "rust-belt" cities.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
The median age of a new homebuyer has risen steadily since 2008- due to the higher prices of homes, many were priced out of the market. Only middle age folks had the wealth to pay for these expensive homes- boosting houselessness across the spectrum but especially in young people.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
With a collapsing economy and slowly rising rent and home prices, dozens of thousands of people were pushed onto the streets each week- and did not have a way back into housing. They turned to drugs, crime, and more to deal with the pain and anxiety.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
Economic self-reliance- especially for men, is closely linked to rates of depression and sewacyde. When the jobs in the city leave, the houses get too expensive to own, and the school tuition skyrockets; many feel an overwhelming hopelessness and turn to self destructive habits to cope with the pain.
Typically in a recession the Treasury will increase spending to cushion the blow to workers- and in 2009 they did extend a few unemployment benefits. But, by and large, Congress authorized few benefit programs for workers, and the average time on the benefit decreased after a slight bump in 2009. At the same time, the Fed was pumping massive amounts of cash into the banking system, boosting equity and bond prices to cope with the fallout of '08.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
This caused the beginning of a massive bull market- 70% of the gains for the last 30 years have occurred since the Fed began their massive QE (🐒 Quantitative Easing) program. This would benefit the real economy, they claimed- creating what is called a "wealth effect", the behavioral economic theory suggesting that people spend more as the value of their assets rise.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
The idea is that consumers feel more financially secure and confident about their wealth when their homes or investment portfolios increase in value. They are made to feel richer, even if their income and fixed costs are the same as before.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
However- who does this really benefit? Studies show that the majority of the equities are owned by the top 10% in terms of wealth- in fact, these wealthy individuals own 89% of all listed US stocks!
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
The median American worker saw his bosses become enormously wealthy, without additional work or effort put in, while his/her wages were stagnant for basically the entire decade. This further contributed to economic despair and gave people a sense of a "rigged system" and that the American dream, touted by the Baby Boomers and those before them, was now dead.
Upward mobility became increasingly difficult as home and asset prices rose without a corresponding increase in median wages.
Something had changed since 2008. Although the NBER ( 🐒 National Bureau of Economic Research) claimed that we had only experienced a recession, if we use their original terminology we actually had been through a depression.
Depressions were originally defined as prolonged periods of economic underperformance, which by all indications we were experiencing. GDP (🐒 Gross Domestic Product) nominally was rising, but much of that could be attributed to increased government spending (component of GDP) and base effects of recovering from a weakened economy. NBER estimates we underperformed GDP potential by around $8.2 Trillion in real growth since ’08, which would have mostly gone to middle and working class workers in the form of wages.
Although unemployment spiked post 2008 and then began falling, a large part of the reason for this is how unemployment is actually calculated. They include people who do not have jobs and are actively looking for work- but what about those who have given up and no longer are looking? they are not included in these stats- which is why we see a falling Labor Force Participation rate (above) even when the unemployment figures are reportedly falling.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
Millions of Americans have left the workforce- and many of these people have ended up houseless, dependent to drugs, and worse. According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, almost 100k people lost their lives in 2020 due to an overdose- 5x the rate of the early 2000s:
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
The Fed has also worked to suppress interest rates to the zero bound- stimulating credit growth and pushing money out on the risk curve. This brought enormous sums of cash into the tech space, where companies received insane multiples on incredibly low earnings.
Tech linked indices, like the NASDAQ, saw enormous price gains in excess of the other "blue chip" stocks of the real economy. Facebook, Apple and Google became trillion dollar companies and VCs (🐒 Venture Capitalists) were willing to pour in unlimited funding for whatever the tech giants wanted.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
This virtually unlimited cash gave the tech firms the resources to supercharge their apps to become mass psychology manipulation tools- to addict young people, causing anxiety and depression. Worst of all, it pushed sewacyde rates up, especially among young girls, who were fed unending comparisons and social judgement from their peers in the digital milieu. These apps have gotten more ubiquitous and more entrenched over time- if any young person wants to be relevant and have friends, they are pushed to buy into these harmful apps.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
Of course, some may say this was inevitable, as the tech giants would eventually be pushing for profit and exploiting these children anyways- but the Fed certainly sped up this process significantly by lowering interest rates and allowing unprofitable tech firms to borrow freely, pushing up valuations and allowing them to raise mind boggling amounts of cash.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
Money is power, and power can buy many things, even the ability to influence minds.
Young people nowadays are in most ways actually worse off than their parents. They can't buy a home. They can't afford school. They can't get a good job. And this issue is causing societal-wide consequences, like a falling marriage and birth rate.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
Couples typically only marry when they can afford their house- although it is commonplace in Latin American and Asian cultures for a married child and spouse to live with parents, this is taboo in the states, where owning a property is considered a rite of passage.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
General rates of depression are rising- humans are made for community, for intimacy.
Turns out we need each other. 🐒��🦍
And by pricing couples out of the housing market, destroying jobs, and hiking asset prices, the Fed has seriously damaged the ability of young people to seriously date and have children. Thus the birth rate is collapsing in the US as well, which portends some disastrous consequences in the next 40 years. Small generations beget small generations- and we may begin a death spiral, similar to Japan where overwhelming amounts of old people are retiring, with no one to replace them. This decreasing population means less workers, less products, and a less industrious economy- creating economic stagnation and decline in the long run. Furthermore, it puts severe strain on the retirement system, such as social security.
The Federal Reserve is responsible for far more of the evils in this world than you can possibly imagine. A macro level due diligence post in Finance & Monetary Economics, with permission from the Bull from Peru, a now published Superstonk DD writer. The Dollar Endgame approaches.
The Social Security trust fund most Americans rely on for their retirement will run out of money in 12 years, one year sooner than expected, according to an annual government report. The outlook, aggravated by the 😷🌐, also threatens to shrink retirement payments and increase health-care costs for older Americans. When the program was created, there were over 6 young workers paying in for every 1 retiree receiving benefits. That figure is now less than 3:1, and is soon falling to 2:1
Through the magic of QE (🐒 Quantitative Easing), the Fed has exacerbated the worst houseless, mental health, and population crisis the United States has ever faced. These issues are incredibly complex and hard to remedy- and it may take decades to undo the damage.


UK air traffic chaos: easyJet lays on flights for stranded customers
Failure blamed on ‘dodgy’ flight plan by unnamed carrier could cost airlines £100m
EasyJet has begun the repatriation of customers stranded by Monday’s collapse of the UK’s air traffic control system, with five flights scheduled to bring customers back to Gatwick airport, as airlines estimated the failure could cost them up to £100m.
Airlines are facing costs “in the tens of millions”, according to Willie Walsh, the former chief executive of British Airways, who is now the director general of theInternational Air Transport Association, as disruption extended into the third day.
“I would imagine at an industry level we’ll be getting close to £100m of additional costs that airlines have encountered as a result of this failure,” Walsh told the BBC, although he cautioned it was too early to determine the eventual cost.
The chief executive of the air traffic control service Nats (formerly National Air Traffic Services), Martin Rolfe, confirmed the chaos was caused when part of the system collapsed on Monday because it “didn’t recognise a message”.
Rolfe’s comments appear to confirm claims by unnamed sources, reported by the Independent on Tuesday, that the failure was triggered when a French airline submitted a “dodgy” flight plan the system could not process.
Walsh said the outage led to the cancellation of about 1,100 flights to and from four UK airports – Heathrow, Gatwick, Stansted and Manchester – on Monday, affecting the journeys of hundreds of thousands of passengers. He said Nats had questions to answer, adding it was “staggering” that a single piece of data could have been at fault.
The airlines are not hopeful that they will be able to recoup any of their costs from Nats, according to Walsh.
“This is what really frustrates and angers airlines. This was completely outside the control of the airlines and yet airlines are subject to paying customers for delays, for cancellations, for looking after them, which is very considerable,” he said.
“It’s very unfair because the air traffic control system, which was at the heart of this failure, doesn’t pay a single penny.”
Rolfe apologised to affected passengers and said the company did not underestimate the impact of the outage.
“We worked absolutely as quickly as we could to make sure we could safely restore the service,” Rolfe told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.
“Almost all the time it handles it absolutely perfectly. In fact, this is staggering, in the sense that it is incredibly rare. And we make it our business to make sure it is incredibly rare.”
Asked why the flight data that caused widespread cancellations was not rejected “like a piece of spam”, Rolfe said: “Our systems are safety-critical systems; they are dealing with the lives of passengers and the travelling public. So even things like just throwing data away needs to be very carefully considered.
“If you throw away a critical piece of data, you may end up in the next 30 seconds, a minute or an hour with something that then is not right on the screens in front of the controller.”
EasyJet said the first of its two repatriation flights would depart the UK on Wednesday to collect passengers from Palma in Mallorca and Faro in Portugal. These will be followed by flights to Tenerife in the Canary Islands in Spain and Enfidha in Tunisia on Thursday, and the Greek island of Rhodes on Friday.
The airline said: “During this traditionally very busy week for travel, options for returning to the UK are more limited on some routes.”
It added that it was operating larger aircraft on popular routes including Faro, Ibiza, Dalaman and Tenerife to provide approximately 700 additional seats this week.


Why Gabon’s coup plotters can count on popular support
Jason Burke
A strong desire for change – even if it comes wearing combat fatigues – is feeding Africa’s series of putsches
The routine is now very familiar: the sudden putsch, the president confined, the nocturnal statement by new, camouflaged rulers. Today it is the turn of Gabon to wake up to find a military coup has brought sudden and unexpected political upheaval in a country that had been considered relatively stable.
On this occasion, the men in uniform introduced themselves as members of the Committee of Transition and the Restoration of Institutions. If successful, the coup will be the eighth in west and central Africa since 2020 to lead to a violent – or at least coerced – change in regime. The most recent was last month in Niger.
Soldiers have also seized power in Mali, Guinea, Burkina Faso, Chad and Sudan in the past two years. Now other leaders of Gabon’s neighbouring states will feel threatened – notably Denis Sassou Nguesso in Congo-Brazzaville – and with some justification.
So far, the ousting of President Ali Bongo Ondimba after 14 years in power appears to have significant popular support, although it is difficult to tell so early. This would not be surprising. Many of the military coups in recent years have been greeted by enthusiastic public celebrations. Some have been organised for the media to win swift legitimacy, but many have been spontaneous outbursts of excitement at the simple prospect of change.
Few doubt Gabon needed a shake-up. The president inherited power from his father, who ruled from 1967 until his death in 2009. Gabon, a member of the Opec oil cartel, with a production of 181,000 barrels of crude a day, should be relatively properous. Yet the quality of life of the vast proportion of its 2 million inhabitants speaks volumes about the decades of mismanagement, clientelism, corruption and blatant political rigging that the Bongo dynasty brought.
The exact motivation for the takeover will soon become clear. It is unlikely to be the protection of Gabon’s institutions from security or other threats, as the new apparent rulers claimed in their first address. The lack of concerted regional, African or global response to the other recent coups is likely to have been a major factor in the soldiers’ decision to gamble their lives and livelihoods on a grab for power.
This failure has been more obvious than ever in recent weeks. Threats of military intervention from Ecowas, the west African regional block, have yet to help restore Mohamed Bazoum, the democratically elected president of Niger ousted in July, and sanctions are not having much effect either. Military regimes in Mali and Burkina Faso appear entrenched. And in Sudan, the biggest threat to the military factions that seized power in 2021 is one another.
In the case of Gabon, the military can count on popular support and that of the opposition. A recent United Nations development programme survey of thousands of people living in countries where coups had recently occurred found strong democratic aspirations. This is true elsewhere, too, and is being reinforced as Africa becomes more urban and educated. But above all, there is a desire for change as soon as possible – even if this means it comes wearing combat fatigues.
There is a wider trend to watch as well. Many of the recent coups are in former French colonies, and one cause is undoubtedly the revived memory of long, exploitative rule from Paris. Africa watchers have long worried about the inherent instability of the system left by France after it ended its direct colonial control across a swath of the continent. This toxic mix of political manipulation, financial control, military intervention, extractive commercial enterprise and cosy relations between elites is far from unique to Francophone Africa but is very entrenched there, even today.
Gabon, too, was a French colony – as recalled by Emmanuel Macron when he met the French-educated Bongo in Paris in late June. The photos of the two presidents shaking hands may not have done either much good.
Every coup is different but many outcomes resemble one another. The new leaders of Gabon will almost certainly follow the same path as their counterparts farther north and announce a “transition period” before new elections, which will not be held for a long time. In the meantime, tearful pleas by Bongo from his official residence, to which he is now confined, for supporters to “make some noise” are likely to fall on deaf ears.


Top 10 books about solitary living
Finding your way without the social template of romantic love is a tough challenge, but writers from Deborah Levy to Hanya Yanagihara offer clues to how it can be done
For most of us, the idea of romantic love has lost hardly any of its allure. It continues to be the focus of our collective fantasies. It is, perhaps, the most essential component of what most people understand happiness to be. But more people live alone now than at any other time in history. People like me. Many of us, willingly or not, have said goodbye to the grand idea of love. Even if some of us still believe in it.
But can you really live a good life alone, without a romantic relationship? How sustainable is a model like that? And how do you learn to live with being alone without it hurting, without lying to yourself? These were the questions that I didn’t know the answers to when I started writing my book, Alone. But I knew that I needed to find them. Some of the answers I found in literature – in a wide array of essays and novels, it turned out. This is a small selection.
1. The Cost of Living by Deborah Levy
Many people find themselves in relationships that make them unhappy but are unable to end them because they’re afraid of being and staying alone. It’s a fear that our culture deeply instils in all of us, partly because there are too few books like this one. The Cost of Living, the second instalment of Levy’s Living Autobiography series, deals with what happens when life falls apart and we do not want to mend it any more. It’s a book about what comes after marriage, about breaking out of the societal roles all of us have internalised. About wanting everything from life and the harsh but worthwhile price we pay for it.
2. Bluets by Maggie Nelson
Whenever one of your friends is lovesick, give them a copy of Bluets. It’s an essay of melancholy genius. Purportedly a meditation on the colour blue, it examines the pains of pining for someone and, in the end, the subsiding of these pains. Nelson tries to find dignity in loneliness but fails, arriving instead at embracing solitude as a way of relating to and fully seeing the world. The essay is a marvel to read, again and again.
3. Ti Amo by Hanne Ørstavik
There are times in life we all encounter crushing loneliness, regardless of how many friends we have and whether we’re in a romantic relationship or not. One of these times comes when somebody we love dies. In her autofictional novella, Norwegian writer Ørstavik tries to come to terms with the loneliness of anticipatory grief. She has moved to Milan to be with the man she loves, only to find out he has cancer and less than a year to live. Ti amo chronicles the daily life of someone who can’t talk about what’s going on inside her to anyone. It’s a gripping book, and impossible to forget.
4. The Lonely City by Olivia Laing
For anyone who wants to read and think about loneliness, this is the holy grail. Olivia Laing is such a masterful writer. Her reflections on the psychology and psychoanalysis of loneliness are as deft as they are enlightening. And her shedding light on the art and lives of queer artists such as Klaus Nomi, Peter Hujar and David Wojnarowicz, who at some point were almost forgotten, is a joy. Throughout her essays Laing makes clear that even though loneliness is debilitating and makes us feel unlike ourselves, it’s very human, too.

5. A Little Life by Hanya Yanagihara
I personally feel that Hanya Yanagihara is our Tolstoy. In a way, all three of her novels deal with people going through their lives alone. This theme is most pronounced in A Little Life. Yanagihara rigorously examines how it is possible to lead a life shaped by trauma, and whether an almost perfect adopted family can change the daily encounters with the psychological and bodily consequences of that trauma. It’s a novel of an intensity beyond compare.
6. Look at Me by Anita Brookner
I’m not sure which of Anita Brookner’s novels I love most. They all are gorgeously written and deal with being single in a way that no novels have before or since. Brookner trains unflinching attention on the emotional vicissitudes of life in a society that gives single people the feeling they really are terrible failures. Despite its dry humour, Look at Me is a book that can break your heart. Brookner makes her readers feel well-mannered librarian Fanny’s slow-burning devastation acutely. She leaves us breathless, and a little devastated ourselves.
7. Accident: A Day’s News by Christa Wolf
Wolf is the German writer I love most. In this autofictional novel from 1987, she chronicles a day she spends by herself in a little house in the East German countryside trying to make sense of two competing events in her life: the risky brain surgery her brother undergoes that day and the nuclear meltdown in Cernobyl a few days before. It’s a difficult book at times because Wolf is grappling with something that our psyches usually don’t allow us to see: how helpless we are in the face of fateful events beyond our control, and how catastrophically we are thrown into history. Accident is so inspiring because Wolf knows that we have to deal with that fact alone – and gives us a hard-won example of how to do just that.
8. Assembly by Natasha Brown
There are different kinds of solitude and also different kinds of loneliness. One of them is what the philosopher Jill Stauffer calls “ethical loneliness”. It’s the feeling of being abandoned by the society we live in and being confronted with its unacknowledged injustices and cruelties. Brown’s minimalist novel quietly dissects what this kind of loneliness does to us. It unhurriedly evokes our long history of oppression and shows the effects it has on the assembling of our identities. It’s a haunting book that culminates in a decision you can’t get out of your head.
9. The Years by Annie Ernaux
I know, Ernaux’s masterpiece is not strictly a book about aloneness, but its rich and multi-faceted tapestry can teach us more about our solitary lives than most of the books I know. The Years is a meditation on the events of the French writer’s private life and the changing attitudes of the society during her lifetime. Uncompromisingly yet poetically, she chronicles how a society produces loneliness by excluding people because of their sex, gender identity or marriage status. It’s hard to overstate how brilliant this book is. I’m not able to do it justice. If you haven’t read it already, start now.
10. The Vaster Wilds by Lauren Groff
Due out next month, this novel follows an unnamed girl who flees from a colonial settlement in 1600s Virginia to make her way through the forests and rivers of North America. Groff turns the ideological underpinnings of classic Robinsonades deftly on their head. During her fight for survival the girl comes to an understanding of the natural world and her life within it which is a rare testament to the spiritual upsides of loneliness that we can only experience when we are alone.
Alone by Daniel Schreiber is published by Reaktion (£14.95). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.


Mark Thompson: CNN appoints former BBC director general as chief executive
Ex-BBC and New York Times boss Sir Mark Thompson has been appointed to lead CNN following a series of crises and falling ratings at the US news network.
Sir Mark replaces Chris Licht, who struggled to stabilise CNN in his 13 months as chairman and CEO.
The network has also been through the firings of star anchors Chris Cuomo and Don Lemon, and the closure of streaming service CNN+ after just one month.
Sir Mark must also guide CNN during the 2024 US presidential election.
That challenge will coincide with coverage of criminal charges against Donald Trump.
The network has had a famously tempestuous relationship with the former US president, who unsuccessfully tried to sue CNN for defamation, claiming it had created a "false and incendiary association" between him and Adolf Hitler following the last election.
A CNN interview with Mr Trump in May was widely criticised, including by the network's own Christiane Amanpour. Mr Licht stepped down weeks later.
CNN's previous boss Jeff Zucker had been forced to resign in February 2022 after failing to disclose a romantic relationship with a senior executive.
'Pivotal time'
David Zaslav, chief executive of parent company Warner Bros Discovery, described Sir Mark as "a formidable force for CNN and journalism at this pivotal time".
He added: "Mark is a true innovator who has transformed for the digital age two of the world's most respected news organizations."
The British executive was director general of the BBC from 2004 to 2012, and is credited with reviving the fortunes of the New York Times by boosting digital subscriptions as president and CEO from 2012 to 2020.
"I can't wait to roll up my sleeves and get down to work with my new colleagues to build a successful future for CNN," Sir Mark said.
His appointment comes days after Warner Bros Discovery announced a new attempt at launching a CNN streaming service, CNN Max, which will combine existing shows with online-only programming.
CNN's cable TV ratings have been dropping faster than those of its competitors, according to official figures quoted by the Associated Press earlier this year.


Netflix: Streamer's expansion into gaming is 'natural extension'
The Queen's Gambit game is a chess simulator based on the adventures of the series' main character Beth Harmon
Think of Netflix and a memorable television show or movie will likely pop into your mind.
What did you most enjoy? Squid Game? Bridgerton? Stranger Things maybe?
Soon, the streaming service wants video games to be competing for a place on that list.
Netflix says games are a key part of its proposition to stay relevant with audiences in years to come, and is slowly ramping up plans to offer more gaming experiences to subscribers.
Leanne Loombe, vice president of external games at Netflix, tells BBC News: "Games are one of the biggest forms of entertainment out there today, so it really is just a natural extension for Netflix to include them as part of the subscription.
"The lines between the different ways we enjoy our entertainment are blurring. When you're in that moment, looking to sit and watch a movie or be more active and play a game, we want to make sure we have something for you.
"Our goal is to have a game on the service for everyone. Not focus on making one big experience, but rather a selection of titles that members can choose to play."
Since November 2021 games have been available to play on the Netflix app, but this development passed many users by. Loombe says the streaming service has deliberately not been "shouting from the rooftops" but instead taking their time to understand the market place first.
So far, what's being offered are mobile games, with some tied to famous Netflix franchises (like Stranger Things) and others independent of the service (like Reigns: Three Kingdoms).
Currently they're only available to play on mobile devices, although tests are under way to see how they could work on TVs and computers.
This low-key approach is a sensible move according to games journalist Shay Thompson, who explains the industry is "littered with the failed attempts" from legacy media brands to get into the world of gaming.
"When other mainstream entertainment organisations have tried to enter the game space they've really struggled," Thompson says. "I think it's often down to companies fundamentally misunderstanding what it is about games as a form of entertainment that make them so compelling to players.
"Amazon Games is an example of this, they've had titles like Lost Ark and and Crucible with big budgets but those titles lacked the creativity and uniqueness that we've come to expect from the games space. That's a significant reason why those titles haven't ended up making a serious impact."
Experiences such as this and tech giant Google, who closed its Stadia console this year, show how difficult it is to find a place in the games space for companies.
Amazon's games division may not yet be as successful as its Prime Video operation, however we still expect to see more titles from them in future. The company is currently working on a the next iteration of the Tomb Raider franchise starring Lara Croft.
"Focusing on the mobile games first is a clever strategy that could work in Netflix favour," says Thompson. "It looks as if they're talking the time to understand the landscape and gamers. I know their reputation has been a bit shaky on the streaming side-recently, but it certainly seems like they're trying to work with the games space and not against it.
"However giving gamers what they want, not what a big organisations think they want, will be the key to making this work. That is creativity and being unique."
Amazon have been making games, like multiplayer experience New World, since 2012
In future, Loombe says we can expect to see Netflix leverage its intellectual property even more. "Connecting shows, movies and games together from our universes is what we're trying to accomplish," she explains.
In a trendy office space in central Liverpool, that's exactly what the team at Ripstone Studios are trying to do.
In amongst the exposed brick, succulent plants and pop culture memorabilia littered on the desks are developers and programmers busy creating the next update for their first partnership with Netflix. The Queen's Gambit is, as you may have guessed, a chess simulator based on the adventures of the television series' main character Beth Harmon.
The team won the contract to make the game after Jaime Brayshaw, the creative executive, sent Netflix an email out of the blue.
"I asked them when will Netflix become the Netflix of games?!" he laughs.
Ripstone, who have a long history of making chess games, became one of the first companies to partner with the streaming giant to work on their games offering.
Brayshaw says the relationship is not just a licensing agreement, but rather a "collaborative partnership" with both companies sharing expertise with each other.
As well as offering more content to Netflix customers in an increasingly competitive market, Brayshaw thinks their collaboration is a chance to help grow gaming as a form of entertainment as well: "Netflix has an audience 238 million people now," he says.
"Many of them will never have played a game before, so we had to think about designing one that is accessible to as many people as possible, even if they've never played a video game.
"Its exciting because it potentially allows more people to experience the joys of playing games and it could broaden the popularity of the medium."
Netflix started offering games, such as Stranger Things 3: The Game, to subscribers in 2021
Confident that this agreement is a "win-win", Brayshaw isn't worried about joining the long history of failed game and movie or television tie-ins.
"Yes there are lots of bad examples from yesteryear with tie-ins that are bad, but it's usually because there are timelines involved," he argues.
"Netflix has a more mature approach, where the products don't have to tie together at release, so fewer compromises are needed."
The streamer will be keen to learn from the other big media organisations renowned for working in film, television or tech who've tried to cross the divide into the games space.
Google's cloud gaming service Stadia was discontinued in January, while Amazon's games division has developed its own titles with mixed success.
It is currently working on a new Lara Croft game but none of its releases so far have challenged the popularity of titles like Fortnite or Call of Duty. There were redundancies at the studio earlier this year.
By focusing on mobile titles, which are cheaper to make than big console releases, there is less financial risk for Netflix. It isn't investing millions in one experience that has to compete with well established brands to be deemed a success.
Should a project fail to reach lots of players, the financial ramifications are not as significant.
The Queen's Gambit is the latest example of Netflix leveraging its intellectual property in the gaming space
However the other side of the coin is that in such a competitive space, if players are not impressed with what they're seeing, if they feel it lacks scope or ambition, they will very quickly move on to something else. It can be difficult to regain an audience that has moved on to other games.
This bottom-up approach is different to what we've seen before and we wont be able to judge its success for some time.
As Loombe reiterates: "We're very early in our games journey right now. When it's such a big industry like games, and there's already some fantastic titles out there in the market that players really love, we just want to make sure we were doing things in the right way."


Nagorno-Karabakh: 'People are fainting queuing up for bread'
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
Demonstrators rally to demand the reopening of a blockaded road linking the Nagorno-Karabakh region to Armenia, in Stepanakert, 25 July 2023
Demonstrations have been taking place in Nagorno-Karabakh's regional capital Stepanakert, demanding the reopening of a blockaded road linking the region to Armenia
By Rayhan Demytrie
BBC South Caucasus correspondent, Armenian border
They call it the Road of Life, as it is the only route connecting 120,000 ethnic Armenians living in Azerbaijan's Nagorno-Karabakh region with the Republic of Armenia.
But for nearly nine months the Lachin Corridor has been blocked by Azerbaijani authorities, resulting in severe shortages of food, medication, hygiene products and fuel in the breakaway region.
Eighteen-year old Hayk is standing on the balcony of a modest hotel in Goris on the Armenian side of the border with Azerbaijan, speaking to his mother on a video call.
"No eggs, no sugar, there are no sweets at all, bread is being rationed, got up at 04:00 the other day to stand in the queue," says his mother, speaking from the Karabakh town of Martakert.
Hayk is not his real name. I have changed it for his own safety.
Armenians are unable to reach their families on the other side of the Lachin Corridor because it has been blocked by Azerbaijan since December.
No independent media have been able to reach the Nagorno-Karabakh enclave. Photos and videos of empty shops have been circulating on social media.
Professional headshot of Irina HayrapetyanIrina Hayrapetyan
People have to walk many kilometres by foot to stand in queues to buy whatever they can to feed their families
"People are standing in queues for hours to get minimal food rations. People are fainting in the bread queues," local journalist Irina Hayrapetyan says in a recorded voice message from inside the ethnic Armenian enclave.
"We have no fuel for transport and people have to walk many kilometres by foot to stand in queues to buy whatever they can to feed their families."
Local authorities in Nagorno-Karabakh say one in three deaths is due to malnutrition.
"I know a case when a pregnant woman lost her child because there was no petrol to get her to hospital," says Hayk's mother.
She speaks of no gas since March, no fuel, no medication - not even shampoo - and regular power cuts. With winter coming it will get worse.
Her son feels hatred, fear and despair: "Because I understand sooner or later my home, my city, my country will be taken by Azerbaijan."
Long line of trucks stuck at the entrance to the Lachin corridor
Lorries with 400 tonnes of humanitarian aid for Karabakh, including food, medicine, baby formula and other essentials are parked in front of the Azerbaijani checkpoint
For Karabakh Armenians their home is Artsakh, a self-declared republic that does not exist on the world map, as this mountainous enclave is part of Azerbaijan's Nagorno-Karabakh region.
Despite having so much in common culturally, the two South Caucasus states of Armenia and Azerbaijan have fought for control of this land for decades in wars that have cost tens of thousands of lives.
In the most recent six-week war in 2020, Azerbaijan recaptured all the territories surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh held by Armenia since 1994.
A ceasefire brokered by Russia relied on the deployment of Russian peacekeepers to guarantee the safety of ethnic Armenians and to control the Lachin Corridor, allowing for the free movement of people and goods between Karabakh and the Republic of Armenia.
But with Russia's focus on the war in Ukraine, Azerbaijan blocked the road to Nagorno-Karabakh's regional capital Stepanakert (known in Azerbaijan as Khandendi) with government-backed environmental activists last December.
A map shows the location of the Lachin Corridor and the Armenia-Azerbaijan border
1px transparent line
In April, Azerbaijan installed its own military checkpoint at the entrance to the Lachin Corridor justifying its "sovereign right" and "full restoration of its territorial integrity". It accused Armenia of using the road to bring in military supplies, which Armenia denies.
The only international humanitarian organisations with access to Nagorno-Karabakh are the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the mine-clearance organisation, the Halo Trust.
The Halo Trust says it has been unable to deploy demining teams in recent weeks because its staff are too exhausted to work after queuing for bread all night and returning home empty-handed. It says halting operations in Martakert is particularly unfortunate as it has become a hub for people displaced by the war in 2020 - and they are now at risk of injury as well as malnutrition.
Although the Red Cross has been carrying out medical evacuations it has not been able to guarantee safe passage, as the Khachatryan family found out on 29 July.
That was the day 68-year-old Vagif Khachatryan was being transported to Armenia's capital Yerevan for urgent surgery for a heart condition.
"When they approached the Azerbaijani checkpoint, they said they needed to take him for 10 minutes to ask him a few questions," says his daughter Vera Khachatryan. "My father was taken away with a Red Cross employee; a few minutes later the Red Cross employee returned but my father was taken in an unknown direction."
Originally from Karabakh, she moved to the Armenian town of Jermuk after her village was returned to Azerbaijan as part of the ceasefire agreement.
"Now every minute, every second I am thinking: What if his heart stops?"
Vera Khachatryan sits on a bench by St Gayane Church in Jermuk, Armenia
Image caption,
Vera Khachatryan fears for her father's health after he was taken by the Azerbaijani authorities on his way to Armenia for heart surgery
Azerbaijan's authorities have accused her father of war crimes committed during the First Karabakh war in 1992.
"There are a lot of eyewitnesses who recognise him through media reports. We never said war criminals shouldn't face justice," says Hikmet Hajiyev, special adviser to Azerbaijan's President Ilham Aliyev.
Vera says the accusations are untrue. "Defending your country is not a crime. There cannot be a fair trial in Azerbaijan. Maybe there will be justice one day, but we don't have the time to wait for it."
Vagif Khachatryan's case has sent a shock wave among men in Nagorno-Karabakh. Three young Karabakh Armenian football players were detained this week at the same checkpoint for desecrating the Azerbaijani flag in 2021.
The fear now is that any ethnic Armenian male could face the same fate if they try to cross.
Vera's two other sisters remain in Karabakh under blockade.
"My sister's granddaughter is two months old, there is no baby formula, her mother does not have enough milk as she is not eating properly. There is no medicine for my 22-year-old nephew who was brain-damaged during the war, he lost his ability to speak and his right arm does not move."
This month the US called on Azerbaijan to restore free movement along the Lachin Corridor during an emergency UN Security Council meeting on the crisis.
The International Court of Justice had already told Azerbaijan it had a legally binding order to allow "unimpeded movement of persons, vehicles and cargo" on the road in both directions.
But Armenians are sceptical of the international community's commitment to resolve the crisis. Protesters in Yerevan have blocked the entrance to the UN office with food and sacks of flour to demand the road's reopening.
Soldiers stand by boxes filled with sunflower oil outside UN offices in Yerevan
Boxes of food items, including sunflower oil, pile up outside the UN offices in Yerevan
Azerbaijan denies a humanitarian crisis is unfolding. It says it wants full control of the territory, and has offered an alternative supply route via the town of Agdam, retaken during the 2020 war.
"Then afterwards the Lachin road will be opened in 24 hours as well. More roads are better for everybody," says the Azerbaijani president's special adviser.
Hikmet Hajiyev says Karabakh Armenians have been offered the same "linguistic, cultural, religious, including municipal rights" as Azerbaijani citizens.
But Armenia's ambassador at large, Edmon Marukyan, accuses Azerbaijan of making false promises when there is only one route connecting Armenia to Nagorno-Karabakh. "They want to try and change the focus of the international community, to dissolve the understanding and obligation of the Lachin Corridor."
Former UN special rapporteur Gulnara Shahinian warns that severing the last link with the Republic of Armenia will spell annihilation for Karabakh Armenians. "You know what level of human rights violations occur in Azerbaijan. With their entire hatred policy, how could you expect that there would be a good attitude towards Armenians in Karabakh?"
A short drive from Goris, a mountain panorama offers a clear view of the current crisis.
On the Armenian side, nothing moves along a new road built to circumvent territory returned to Azerbaijan as part of the 2020 ceasefire agreement.
A line of lorries loaded with 400 tonnes of humanitarian aid for Karabakh, including food, medicine, baby formula and other essentials is parked along the approach to the Azerbaijani checkpoint.
Remembering the one thing Hayk's mother misses most is cooking oil, I ask a lorry driver waiting in Goris what he is transporting.

"Twenty-two tonnes of cooking oil."
G20: Delhi to scare monkeys away from summit with cut-outs and mimicry
Authorities in India's capital, Delhi, are taking steps to scare away monkeys from venues linked to the G20 summit.
Life-size cut-outs of grey langur monkeys - which scare smaller monkeys - have been put up at various places and there are plans to deploy people trained to mimic the animal's sounds.
Delhi has a huge monkey population and authorities hope these steps will keep the animals from disrupting the summit.
India will host the meeting of G20 leaders on 9 and 10 September.
Langurs are an aggressive type of monkey with long tails and dark faces. They are typically controlled on leads by specially trained handlers, who release them once other monkeys are seen.
A senior official told PTI news agency that langur cut-outs were being placed in areas heavily infested with monkeys.
Satish Upadhyay said that 30-40 trained people who can mimic sounds made by langurs will be deployed at hotels where delegates are set to stay, as well as in places where monkey sightings are reported.
G20: What will leaders talk about at the Delhi summit?
Authorities are also making arrangements to provide food for monkeys in designated sites, aiming to discourage them from lingering in search of food.
On previous occasions too - including the 2010 Commonwealth Games - authorities in Delhi have tried to scare away monkeys with the help of real langurs or people who can mimic them.
In 2014, authorities hired 40 professional langur impersonators to scare away monkeys from the parliament and other government buildings in the capital.
Parliament authorities had earlier used real langurs for the same purpose, but stopped after animal rights activists said holding monkeys captive amounted to cruelty.
BBC News India is now on YouTube. Click here to subscribe and watch our documentaries, explainers and features.


The average age of Congress is rising. That’s unlikely to change soon.
For the second time in about a month, Republican Minority Leader Mitch McConnell froze up for 20 seconds while speaking to reporters. It marks the latest in a string of episodes involving different lawmakers to call attention to the age and health of the legislature.
On the whole, Congress is getting older.
The current class of lawmakers is one of the oldest in history, with an overall median age of 59. The median age of senators is 65, the highest on record. In the House, the median age has hovered between 57 and 58 for the past decade, higher than in any year before that period.
The 118th Congress is one of the oldest

These numbers have steadily ticked up since the 2000s, even as the country elects younger members. The freshman class sworn in this year was the youngest in recent history, with 18 new lawmakers under 40 elected to both chambers.


But the older generations still dominate Congress, and debates about term limits, ageism, and the overall fitness of the gerontocracy to lead the nation have become a feature of American political discourse.


Share this article
Share
At 81, McConnell is the fourth-oldest senator and one of more than two-dozen members who come from the Silent Generation born between the late 1920s and the end of World War II.
One of McConnell’s peers, 90-year-old Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), is the oldest senator and has experienced severe health complications this year after recovering from a case of shingles. Last month, she appeared confused when called on to cast a vote in a committee hearing and had to be nudged by the committee chair, Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.), to say “aye.”
This Senate is the oldest in American history. Should we do anything about it?
Congress has long been older than the overall American population, and the nation’s median age is creeping up, too. But with baby boomers, the generation that came after McConnell’s and Feinstein’s, making up nearly half of Congress, it’s unlikely that the age balance among lawmakers will change significantly any time soon.
Millennials such as 38-year-old J.D. Vance (R-Ohio) and 33-year-old Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-N.Y.) account for just 12 percent of lawmakers in the Capitol. And Gen Z is represented by a single member, Rep. Maxwell Frost (D-Fla.), who became the youngest member of this Congress and the first elected from his generation when he won his race in the district encompassing Orlando last fall.


Families crossing U.S. border illegally reached all-time high in August
By Nick Miroff and Maria Sacchetti
Record numbers of migrant families streamed across the U.S.-Mexico border in August, according to preliminary data obtained by The Washington Post, an influx that has upended Biden administration efforts to discourage parents from entering illegally with children and could once again place immigration in the spotlight during a presidential race.
Sign up for Fact Checker, our weekly review of what's true, false or in-between in politics.
The U.S. Border Patrol arrested at least 91,000 migrants who crossed as part of a family group in August, exceeding the prior one-month record of 84,486 set in May 2019, during the Trump administration. Families were the single largest demographic group crossing the border in August, surpassing single adults for the first time since Biden took office.
Overall, the data show, border apprehensions have risen more than 30 percent for two consecutive months, after falling sharply in May and June as the Biden administration rolled out new restrictions and entry opportunities. The Border Patrol made more than 177,000 arrests along the Mexico border in August, up from 132,652 in July and 99,539 in June.
Erin Heeter, a spokesperson for the Department of Homeland Security, said the Biden administration is trying to slow illegal entries by expanding lawful options and also stiffening penalties. The government ramped up deportation flights carrying families in August, she said, and since May has repatriated more than 17,000 parents and children who recently crossed the border in a family group.
“But as with every year, the U.S. is seeing ebbs and flows of migrants arriving fueled by seasonal trends and the efforts of smugglers to use disinformation to prey on vulnerable migrants and encourage migration,” Heeter said in a statement.
Family groups have been an Achilles’ heel for U.S. immigration enforcement for over a decade. Most migrants in that category who are detained by Border Patrol agents are quickly released and allowed to live and work in the United States while their humanitarian claims are pending. Backlogged U.S. immigration courts typically take several years to reach a decision, and the process rarely ends in deportation, federal data show.
Coming amid peak summer heat, the latest surge underscores the extent to which U.S. immigration enforcement has come full circle since Trump’s tenure, when the Department of Homeland Security faced an influx of families crossing from Mexico and for several months tried taking children from their parents as a deterrent.
Trump officials eventually reduced family crossings by aggressively expanding the “Remain in Mexico” program, which sent thousands of asylum seekers back across the border to wait, many in squalid conditions, while their claims were adjudicated in U.S. courts.
When the pandemic hit in early 2020, Trump used a provision of Title 42, the U.S. public health code, to rapidly expel border-crossers to their home countries or Mexico without a chance to seek asylum. U.S. Customs and Border Protection carried out 3 million expulsions, including of families, between March 2020 and May 2023, records show.
President Biden, who ran for office pledging more humane treatment for migrants, halted Remain in Mexico and closed the three detention centers for families operated by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Biden has replaced the pandemic policy with new measures that allow tens of thousands more migrants to come to the United States legally each month but make it harder for those who cross illegally to get released after making an asylum claim.
The latest Customs and Border Protection data show more than 50,000 migrants were processed in August at U.S. border crossings, where the Biden administration is allowing up to 1,450 per day to schedule an appointment to enter the country lawfully using a mobile app. That increased the total number of migrants encountered by CBP at the southern border in August — at legal crossings or elsewhere — to about 230,000, the highest one-month total this calendar year.
A Venezuelan migrant breastfeeds her 10-month-old son while wading through the Rio Grande with others in search of an entry point into the United States in July. (Adrees Latif/Reuters)
A separate Biden program accepts roughly 30,000 applicants per month from Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua and Venezuela who obtain authorization to live and work in the United States for two years if they have a financial sponsor and clear background checks. The program, known as parole, allows beneficiaries to fly to the United States instead of crossing at the border.
Both programs are facing challenges in federal court from officials in Republican-led states.
Illegal crossings by migrants from the parole-eligible countries have fallen sharply. But CBP records show major increases this summer in migration from Guatemala, Honduras, Ecuador, Peru and an array of nations in Asia and Africa. The arrival of thousands of parents with children in remote areas amid triple-digit temperatures is a major humanitarian, linguistic and logistical challenge.
The Biden administration has expanded the border agency’s network of climate-controlled “soft-sided” tent facilities with medical staff and social workers on hand to help care for children. But many families still first encounter traditional CBP stations, which have windowless, grim detention cells with concrete benches and were designed as short-term holding facilities for adults.
Blas Nuñez-Neto, the Biden administration’s top border policy official, said in a federal court filing last week that bipartisan efforts to control the border helped reduce illegal crossings from more than 1 million a year decades ago to fewer than 400,000 a year, on average, from 2011 to 2017.
But partisan gridlock has intensified — and the demographic makeup of migrants has changed. Officials saw a marked increase in families and unaccompanied minors arriving at the southern border. Some have been targeted by violence in their home countries that could make them eligible for humanitarian programs. But others are relying on promises from smugglers, who tell them families are far less likely to be deported.
The August tally brings the total number of “family member units” surrendering at the southern border during the current fiscal year to more than half a million people, a record, with one more month to count.
The Biden administration has sent mixed messages about targeting families for deportation.
During his first year in office, Biden pledged to reunite the families Trump had separated and to protect undocumented families already living inside the United States. In 2021, Biden administration officials ended family immigration detention and declared schools and “places where children gather” off-limits for immigration enforcement. Officials said they would not detain or deport women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
But officials said they would continue to deport families who had recently crossed the border, worried that if they didn’t, their numbers would overwhelm Border Patrol facilities. In recent months, Biden administration officials have held news conferences with Spanish-language media and published footage of deportation flights carrying children to discourage families from attempting to cross.
Border crossings down, but many migrants released to U.S. to avoid crowding
The Biden administration also has created enforcement programs targeting families: In 2021, Department of Homeland Security and Justice Department officials created a “dedicated” immigration court docket in 11 cities to adjudicate family cases within 300 days of the initial hearing. The expedited system, which is not for all families, is much faster than the usual time for the backlogged immigration courts.
The program operates in Boston, Denver, Detroit, El Paso, Los Angeles, Miami, Newark, New York, San Diego, San Francisco and Seattle. Advocates for immigrants say the system is unfair because thousands of migrants have been unable to find lawyers and it is unclear how families are assigned to the faster docket.
In May, Biden officials launched the Family Expedited Removal Management program, or FERM, which places some heads of households under GPS monitoring and into the fast-track deportation process. These families also have mandatory curfews from 11 p.m. to 5 a.m. CBS News reported Thursday that fewer than 100 family members have been deported from that program.
“FERM is one element of DHS’s operations to enforce U.S. immigration law and to remove individuals and families without a legal basis to stay in the country,” DHS’s Heeter said.
DHS has removed or returned more than 200,000 recently arrived migrants since May, Heeter said, a number that includes the 17,000 who came to the United States as part of a family group.
In fiscal year 2019, Immigration and Customs Enforcement deported more than 5,700 people who had entered the United States as part of a family group, more than double the number from the year before, according to a federal report.
Official family deportations spiked to nearly 14,500 in 2020 and then sank during the pandemic, when the government’s usual policies were replaced by quick expulsions under Title 42 that did not carry the same legal penalties as a deportation.


DeSantis voted against Sandy aid a decade ago. Now his state needs the help.
Florida’s Republicans have a complicated relationship with disaster aid.
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) speaks at a news conference Wednesday in Perry, Fla., in the aftermath of Hurricane Idalia. DeSantis — as a Republican and a Floridian — is not unique in his relationship to federal disaster spending. | John Raoux/AP Photo
Ron DeSantis had just been sworn in as a member of the House in 2013 when he voted against sending $9.7 billion in disaster relief to New York and New Jersey, two states still reeling from the damage of Hurricane Sandy.
“I sympathize with the victims,” the Florida Republican said at the time, but objected to what he called Congress’ “put it on the credit card mentality” when it came to government spending.
Now, a day after Hurricane Idalia pummeled Florida less than a year since Hurricane Ian’s destruction, DeSantis is not objecting to federal borrowing when it’ll help his disaster-stricken state. As Florida’s governor — and a 2024 White House contender — he is in regular contact with President Joe Biden as the state seeks dollars from Washington to rebuild from the storm wreckage, assist rescue efforts and aid displaced residents.
DeSantis: Hurricane search and rescue to begin 'as soon as it's safe'
SharePlay Video
This is part of a tradition: Florida Republicans have a history of supporting government assistance for their state’s natural disasters while frequently rejecting broader packages designed to lessen the impact of these emergencies — torn between their constituents’ priorities and their party’s position on reining in the federal debt.
DeSantis’ vote a decade ago was based on his opposition to the Sandy package’s “additional pork spending,” a spokesperson for his presidential campaign said Thursday. Florida GOP lawmakers in both chambers frequently release similar statements after voting against disaster money, citing the country’s sky-high deficit as the determining factor.
But one Florida Republican calls that position increasingly untenable in a state that so frequently finds itself at ground zero for catastrophic hurricanes, just one of the litany of disasters that scientists expect to become worse as the planet warms.
“It’s always understandable why people, in theory, would vote against federal aid when it doesn’t affect them,” said Carlos Curbelo, a former Miami-area GOP member of Congress. “But when you live in Florida, that position is unsustainable.”
DeSantis probably “regrets” taking that vote on Sandy, he added. “He is now in a position of requesting federal aid for hurricane relief for the second year in a row. And these are major asks. These are billions upon billions of dollars.”
Carlos Curbelo.
“It’s always understandable why people, in theory, would vote against federal aid when it doesn’t affect them,” said Carlos Curbelo, a former GOP member of Congress. “But when you live in Florida, that position is unsustainable.” | Alex Wong/Getty Images
It’s been almost 11 years since then-New York Republican Rep. Peter King dared his GOP colleagues to meet their “moral obligation” to help natural disaster-torn communities — a plea that 179 House Republicans, including DeSantis, ultimately rejected.
But DeSantis — as a Republican and a Floridian — is not unique in his relationship to federal disaster spending. The state’s congressional delegation has a history of idiosyncratic voting patterns on legislation that would seek to respond to, or mitigate the impacts of, extreme weather events that are direct results of the worsening climate crisis.
GOP senators weigh ‘special’ meeting on their leadership after McConnell’s freeze
Feinstein is a silent character in her sad and messy final chapter
Why Is Nobody Doing Anything About Mitch McConnell?
Slightly higher times: Biden administration moves to loosen weed restrictions
DeSantis voted against Sandy aid a decade ago. Now his state needs the help.
Republicans from Florida have repeatedly voted to send federal disaster relief to their own state, at times vocally pushing for it.
Sen. Rick Scott (R-Fla.), for instance, has said he will demand “an immediate vote” next week on a bill to refill the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s coffers.
“I will not allow Washington to continue playing games with disaster aid and the lives of those needing our help,” Scott said in a statement.
More broadly, Florida Republicans in Congress have for the last decade largely toed the party line on climate politics, refusing to support legislation that could be perceived as hostile to the oil and gas industry while embracing measures that would help their state in more immediate and tangible ways respond to climate change.
Curbelo predicts it will soon become harder for Florida Republicans to cherry-pick what they are willing to accept and sacrifice.
While Florida has always experienced dangerous hurricanes, he said, it has become especially vulnerable to violent storms, sea-level rise, coastal erosion and heat waves.
“The state is under a lot of stress in terms of insurance issues,” said Curbelo, who spent his two terms in Congress working to push his party to acknowledge the climate crisis.
“Markets are not forgiving; they expose risk and weakness. … With every storm, with every major flooding event, the pressure on Florida members to support a broad climate policy agenda is going to grow.”
Lost ‘bipartisan tradition’
The fight over Sandy funding marked a shift in the debate over what responsibility members of Congress owe one another when faced with natural disasters.
As lawmakers were preparing to adjourn the 112th Congress in the first days of January 2013 after an extended legislative session to address the “fiscal cliff,” House GOP leaders abruptly canceled a vote on Sandy aid amid outcry from conservatives who didn’t want to spend more government money.
After King and other Republicans revolted — and shamed their leadership — a vote was convened swiftly upon reconvening for the 113th Congress on Jan. 15.
The relief bill was passed, 241-180. All but three Florida Republicans voted “no” on the grounds it spent too much money — also DeSantis’ argument at that time.
Jeremy Redfern, a DeSantis press secretary, told POLITICO’s E&E News that “we have no time for politics or pettiness” when asked if the governor wishes he had voted differently in 2013.
“As a member of Congress, DeSantis supported emergency disaster relief funding for Hurricane Sandy, but he did not support the additional pork spending that ended up in the final relief bill,” Bryan Griffin, press secretary for DeSantis’ presidential campaign, added in a separate statement. (Republicans at the time complained that the Sandy package continued to fund a depleted National Flood Insurance Program with money the government didn’t have.)
“As governor,” Griffin said, “DeSantis will of course marshal all available resources (state and federal) to aid those in need during recovery.”
Dan Weiss, a veteran climate advocate, observed that “Sandy was the turning point” in what came next for how congressional Republicans have since approached disaster relief funding votes.
“It used to be extremely bipartisan, like so many other things involving money,” he said. “Peter King came from the bipartisan tradition of providing disaster relief to states based on need.”
Florida Republicans have, by and large, gone on to support sending money to avert weather catastrophes, but typically only if their own state was included — and only as stand-alone propositions, not as part of larger spending packages.
The state’s House GOP delegation, for example, unanimously supported an $81 billion disaster aid package in December 2017 to help Florida, Texas, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands and California rebuild after a series of natural disasters that year, including Hurricanes Irma, Harvey and Maria.
But the delegation split in February 2018, when that disaster money was folded into a larger government spending bill then-President Donald Trump eventually signed into law.
At that point, five Florida Republicans in the House voted against the bill while 11 supported it, siding with Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) and then-Florida Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson in the other chamber.
In 2019, all but two Florida Republicans in the House backed legislation that would, among other things, mitigate the damage done to their state from Hurricane Michael. In the Senate, Rubio and Scott, who had by then unseated Nelson, voted “yes,” too.
Then came Hurricane Ian in 2022. Congress included language in the bill allowing FEMA to tap $19 billion to respond to a slew of natural disasters, including Ian. Every Florida Republican in the House voted against it. Scott opposed it in the Senate; Rubio didn’t vote.
Looming ‘political liability’
Florida Republicans have rallied around other policies to protect their state’s specific environmental interests.
They have continued a time-honored tradition of joining with Democrats to oppose oil drilling in their state’s portion of the Gulf of Mexico, an activity some of them argue could hamper activities at nearby military bases and which all of them see as a risk to the peace, health and safety of Florida communities. But they’ve also criticized the Biden administration’s efforts to limit the practice in other states.
GOP members of the Florida congressional delegation have also typically supported major federal investments to restore the Everglades, the largest subtropical wilderness in the United States.
At the same time, they have not fought back against specific development and mining projects in the area that the Environmental Protection Agency and Florida conservation groups say could threaten endangered species and fragile ecosystems.
Ultimately, said League of Conservation Voters vice president of political affairs Craig Auster, these positions won’t make a difference if Congress isn’t supporting policies to drive down greenhouse gas emissions.
“We’re not going to protect Florida coastal communities, and we’re not going to protect the Everglades, if we aren’t addressing climate change,” Auster said, “because climate change is the biggest threat to both of those things.”
Hurricane Idalia.
A canopy lies wrapped around a tree in an RV park in Mayo, Fla., after the passage of Hurricane Idalia on Wednesday. | Rebecca Blackwell/AP Photo
There have been some occasions since 2013 when Florida Republicans in Congress engaged with Democrats on legislation that would have made targeted, long-lasting contributions to disaster preparedness and resiliency.
In 2019, the House passed the “Reforming Disaster Recovery Act,” which would have required that all post-disaster rebuilding projects funded by certain federal dollars comply with the newest construction codes, which account for the realities of climate change — elevating buildings and designing structures to withstand intense winds, for instance.
The measure advanced in a 290-118 vote, with five of the 71 Republicans favoring it hailing from the Florida delegation. But it has since languished after the Senate failed to take it up.
Yet in the fall of 2013, the Obama administration got little GOP buy-in when it established the Task Force on Climate Preparedness and Resilience to advise on how the federal government could respond to the needs of communities at the forefront of the climate crisis.
Supporters had hoped Republicans would get involved, but not a single GOP federal or statewide elected official joined — not even then-New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Weiss noted, “even though his state suffered extensive damage due to Superstorm Sandy.”
Auster, the League of Conservation Voters vice president, sided with Curbelo: For Florida Republicans, and DeSantis, it’s going to become harder to stay on the sidelines.
“It’s all well and good to say, ‘the government shouldn’t be fighting climate change,’ until your big insurance companies are going to stop providing insurance for unsafe places, and if people can’t get help when their homes are destroyed, and when people are losing their lives to wildfires and floods and hurricanes,” Auster said.
Reporters Ariel Wittenberg and Robin Bravender contributed to this report.










