15 Best GPUs for Machine Learning for Your Next Project
Need a GPU for machine learning? Explore this guide to find the best GPUs for Machine Learning available in the market | ProjectPro

Get Access To All Machine Learning Projects View All Machine Learning Projects
15 Best GPUs for Machine Learning for Your Next Project
Last Updated: 22 Nov 2023  |  BY NISHTHA
Confused about which GPU to choose for your project? This blog covers the top 15 GPUs for machine learning and also guides you through the relevant factors to consider to make an informed decision when selecting a GPU for your next machine learning project. 
According to JPR, the GPU market is expected to reach 3,318 million units by 2025 at an annual rate of 3.5%.  This statistic is a clear indicator of the fact that the use of GPUs for machine learning has evolved in recent years. Deep learning (a subset of machine learning) necessitates dealing with massive data, neural networks, parallel computing, and the computation of a large number of matrices. All these methods use algorithms that process large volumes of data and transform it into usable software. This necessitates using a graphic card for processing to perform these tasks with deep learning and neural networks. GPUs come into play here. Using GPUs, you can break down complex tasks and perform multiple operations simultaneously. In addition, GPUs are ideal for developing deep learning and artificial intelligence models as they can handle numerous computations simultaneously. 
Before diving into the best GPUs for deep learning or the best Graphics card for machine learning, let us know more about GPUs. 

Table of Contents
What is a GPU for Machine Learning?
Why are GPUs better than CPUs for Machine Learning?
How do GPUs for Machine Learning Work? 
How to Choose the Best GPU for Machine Learning
Factors to Consider When Selecting GPUs for Machine Learning 
Algorithm Factors Affecting GPU Use for Machine Learning
Best GPUs for Machine Learning in the Market
15 Best GPUs for Deep Learning 
5 Best NVIDIA GPUs for Deep Learning 
5 Best GPUs for Deep Learning
5 Best Budget GPUs for Deep Learning 
Key Takeaways 
FAQs on GPU for Machine Learning 

What is a GPU for Machine Learning?
A GPU (Graphic Processing Unit) is a logic chip that renders graphics on display- images, videos, or games.  A GPU is sometimes also referred to as a processor or a graphics card. GPUs are used for different types of work, such as video editing, gaming, designing programs, and machine learning (ML). Thus, they are ideal for designers, developers, or anybody looking for high-quality visuals. 
It is possible, however, to find a GPU integrated into a motherboard or in the daughterboard of a graphics card. Initially, graphic cards were only available on high-configuration computers. But today, most desktop computers use a separate graphics card with a GPU rather than one built into the motherboard for increased performance.

Why are GPUs better than CPUs for Machine Learning?
When it comes to machine learning, even a very basic GPU outperforms a CPU. But why so? 
GPUs offer significant speed-ups over CPUs when it comes to deep neural networks. 
GPUs are faster for computing than CPUs. This is because they are ideal for parallel computing and can perform multiple tasks simultaneously. While, CPUs perform sequential tasks. In addition, GPUs are ideal for the computation of Artificial Intelligence and deep learning applications. 
Since data science model training is based on simple matrix operations, GPUs can be used safely for deep learning. 
GPUs can execute many parallel computations and increase the quality of images on the screen. 
GPUs assemble many specialized cores that deal with huge data sets and deliver massive performance.
A GPU devotes more transistors to arithmetic logic than a CPU does to caching and flow control.
Deep-learning GPUs provide high-performance computing power on a single chip while supporting modern machine-learning frameworks like TensorFlow and PyTorch with little or no setup. 

How do GPUs for Deep Learning Work? 
Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) are built explicitly for graphics processing, which requires complex mathematical calculations running parallel to display images on the screen. A GPU receives graphic information such as image geometry, color, and textures from the CPU and executes them to draw images on the screen. Thus, this is how a GPU works to render images on the screen. This complete process of taking instructions to create a final image on the screen is known as rendering. 
For instance, video graphics are made up of polygonal coordinates translated into bitmaps and then into signals shown on a screen. This translation necessitates massive processing power from the Graphics Processing Unit (GPU), which makes GPUs useful in machine learning, artificial intelligence, and other deep learning tasks that necessitate complex computations.

Why use GPUs for ML? 
The next most important question to be answered is why use GPUs for machine learning or why are GPUs better for machine learning? Read on to find out! 
The concept of deep learning involves complex computing tasks such as training deep neural networks, mathematical modeling using matrix calculations, and working with 3D graphics. All these deep learning tasks require choosing a reasonably powerful GPU. 
A distinctive GPU not only helps with a high-quality image but also increases the efficiency of the CPU and achieves outstanding performance. Thus, investing in a top-quality GPU is best to speed up the model training process.
On the other hand, GPUs have dedicated video RAM (VRAM), which provides the required memory bandwidth for massive datasets while freeing up CPU time for different operations. They also enable you to parallelize training tasks by dividing them among processor clusters and carrying out computation operations simultaneously. 
GPUs can perform simultaneous computations involved in machine learning. It is also important to note that you don’t need GPUs to learn machine learning or deep learning. They are essential only when you want to speed up your things while working with complex models, huge datasets,  and a large number of images. 
But how do you choose the best GPU for machine learning? Let’s find out! 

How to Choose the Best GPU for Machine Learning
With this rapidly growing field of GPUs, various options are available in the market to keep the need of designers and data scientists. Therefore, it is essential to keep several factors in mind before purchasing a GPU for machine learning. 

Factors to Consider When Selecting GPUs for Machine Learning 
Below you will find the factors one must consider while deciding on the best graphics card for AI/ML/DL projects:

Factors to Consider When Selecting a GPU
Compatibility
The GPU's compatibility with your computer or laptop should be your primary concern. Does your device's GPU perform well? You can also check the display ports and cables for deep learning applications.
Memory Capacity
The first and most important requirement for selecting GPUs for machine learning is more RAM. Deep learning necessitates intense GPU memory capacity. For example, algorithms that use long videos as training data sets require GPUs with greater memory. Compared to this, the fundamental training data sets function effectively on cloud GPUs with less memory.
Memory Bandwidth 
Large datasets require a lot of memory bandwidth, which GPUs may provide. This is due to the separate video RAM (VRAM) found in GPUs, which lets you save CPU memory for other uses.
GPU’s Interconnecting Ability
The ability to connect multiple GPUs is closely related to your scalability and distributed training strategies. As a result, one should consider which GPU units can be interconnected when selecting a GPU for machine learning. 
TDP value
GPUs can sometimes overheat, as indicated by the TDP value. They can heat up more quickly when they need more electricity to operate, so it is necessary to keep GPUs at a cool temperature. 
Steam Processors
Steam processors, also called CUDA cores, are suitable for professional players and deep learning. A GPU with a high CUDA core increases work efficiency in deep learning applications. 
Looking for end to end solved data science projects? Check out ProjectPro's repository of solved Data Science Projects with Source Code!

Algorithm Factors Affecting GPU Use for Machine Learning
Algorithm Factors Affecting GPU Usage
When it comes to GPU usage, algorithmic factors are equally important and must be considered. Listed below are three factors to consider when scaling your algorithm across multiple GPU for ML: 

Data Parallelism
It is essential to consider how much data your algorithms will need to handle. If the data set is large, the chosen GPU should be able to function efficiently on multi-GPU training. If the data set is large, you must ensure the servers can communicate quickly with storage components to enable effective distributed training. 

Memory Use 
Another essential factor you must consider for GPU usage is the memory requirements for training datasets. For example, algorithms that use long videos or medical pictures as training data sets require a GPU with large memory. On the other hand, simple training data sets used for basic predictions need less GPU memory to work.

GPU Performance
The model's performance also influences GPU selection. Regular GPUs, for example, are used for development and debugging. Strong and powerful GPUs are required for model fine-tuning to accelerate training time and reduce waiting hours.

Best GPUs for Machine Learning in the Market
So, what makes GPU ideal for machine learning? This is because of a variety of reasons. GPUs are designed to do multiple computations in parallel, which is excellent for deep learning algorithms' highly parallel nature. They also contain a large amount of memory, which is useful for deep-learning models that require a lot of data. 

It is also important to note that large-scale operations rarely buy GPUs unless they have their specialized processing cloud. Organizations running machine-learning workloads instead acquire cloud space optimized for high-performance computing. These cloud providers' platforms feature high-performance GPUs and fast memory. But from where do they buy  the best GPU for AI training?

GPU Market Players - Nvidia and AMD
GPU Market Players

There are two major players in the Machine Learning GPU market: AMD and Nvidia. There are a large number of GPUs used for deep learning. However, Nvidia makes the majority of the best ones. Nvidia dominates the market of GPUs, especially for deep learning and complex neural networks, because of their substantial support in the forum, software, drivers, CUDA, and cuDNN. 

Explore Categories

Data Science Projects in Python Data Science Projects in R Machine Learning Projects in Python Machine Learning Projects in R Deep Learning Projects Neural Network Projects Tensorflow Projects Keras Deep Learning Projects NLP Projects Pytorch Data Science Projects in Banking and Finance Data Science Projects in Retail & Ecommerce Data Science Projects in Entertainment & Media Data Science Projects in Telecommunications
Nvidia GPU for Deep Learning 
NVIDIA is a popular choice because of its libraries, known as the CUDA toolkit. These libraries make it simple to set up deep learning processes and provide the foundation of a robust machine learning community using NVIDIA products. In addition to GPUs, NVIDIA also provides libraries for popular deep learning frameworks such as PyTorch and TensorFlow. 

The NVIDIA Deep Learning SDK adds GPU acceleration to popular deep learning frameworks. Data scientists may use powerful tools and frameworks to create and deploy deep learning applications.

NVIDIA's downside is that it has lately set limits on when you may use CUDA. Due to these constraints, the libraries can only be used with Tesla GPUs, not with less costly RTX or GTX hardware. This has significant financial implications for firms training deep learning models. It is also problematic when you consider that, while Tesla GPUs may not provide considerably greater performance than the alternatives, the units cost up to ten times as much.

AMD GPU for Deep Learning
AMD GPUs are excellent for gaming, but Nvidia outperforms when deep learning comes into the picture. AMD GPUs are less in use because of software optimization and drivers that need to be frequently updated. While on the Nvidia side, they have superior drivers with frequent updates, and on top of that, CUDA and cuDNN help accelerate computation.

AMD GPUs have extremely minimal software support. AMD provides libraries such as ROCm. All significant network architectures, as well as TensorFlow and PyTorch, support these libraries. However, community support for the development of new networks is minimal.

15 Best GPU for Deep Learning 2023
Looking at the factors mentioned above for choosing GPUs for deep learning, you can now easily pick the best one from the following list based on your machine learning or deep learning project requirements. 

5 Best NVIDIA GPUs for Deep Learning 
Check out the best NVIDIA GPUs for deep learning below: 

NVIDIA Titan RTX 
NVIDIA Titan RTX is a high-end gaming GPU that is also great for deep learning tasks. Built for data scientists and AI researchers, this GPU is powered by NVIDIA Turing™ architecture to offer unbeatable performance. The TITAN RTX is the best PC GPU for training neural networks, processing massive datasets, and creating ultra-high-resolution videos and 3D graphics. Additionally, it is supported by NVIDIA drivers and SDKs, enabling developers, researchers, and creators to work more effectively to deliver better results.
Technical Features
CUDA cores: 4608
Tensor cores: 576
GPU memory: 24 GB GDDR6
Memory Bandwidth: 673GB/s
Compute APIs: CUDA, DirectCompute, OpenCL™

NVIDIA Tesla V100 
NVIDIA Tesla is the first tensor core GPU built to accelerate artificial intelligence, high-performance computing (HPC), Deep learning, and machine learning tasks. Powered by NVIDIA Volta architecture, Tesla V100 delivers 125TFLOPS of deep learning performance for training and inference. In addition, it consumes less power than other GPUs. NVIDIA Tesla is one of the market's best GPUs for deep learning due to its outstanding performance in AI and machine learning applications. With this GPU, data scientists and engineers may now focus on building the next AI breakthrough rather than optimizing memory usage.
Technical Features
CUDA cores: 5120
Tensor cores: 640
Memory Bandwidth: 900 GB/s
GPU memory: 16GB
Clock Speed: 1246 MHz
Compute APIs: CUDA, DirectCompute, OpenCL™, OpenACC®
Unlock the ProjectPro Learning Experience for FREE

NVIDIA Quadro RTX 8000
NVIDIA Quadro RTX 8000 is the world’s most powerful graphics card built by PNY for deep learning matrix multiplications. A single Quadro RTX 8000 card can render complex professional models with realistically accurate shadows, reflections, and refractions, providing users with rapid insight. Powered by the NVIDIA TuringTM architecture and NVIDIA RTXTM platform, Quadro provides professionals with the latest hardware-accelerated real-time ray tracing, deep learning, and advanced shading. When used with NVLink, its memory may be expanded to 96 GB.
Technical Features
CUDA cores: 4608
Tensor cores: 576
GPU memory: 48 GB GDDR6
Memory Bandwidth: 672 GB/s
Compute APIs: CUDA, DirectCompute, OpenCL™

NVIDIA Tesla P100
Based on NVIDIA Pascal architecture, the Nvidia Tesla p100 is a GPU built for machine learning and HPC. Tesla P100 with NVIDIA NVLink technology provides lightning-fast nodes to reduce time to solution for large-scale applications significantly. With NVLink, a server node may link up to eight Tesla P100s at 5X the bandwidth of PCIe.
Technical Features
CUDA cores: 3,584 
Tensor cores: 64  
Memory Bandwidth: 732 GB/s
Compute APIs: CUDA, OpenCL, cuDNN

NVIDIA RTX A6000
One of the latest GPUs is the NVIDIA RTX A6000, which is excellent for deep learning. Based on the Turing architecture, it can execute both deep learning algorithms and conventional graphics processing tasks. The RTX A6000 also has Deep Learning Super Sampling as a feature (DLSS). This feature can render images at higher resolutions while maintaining quality and speed. A geometry processor, texture mapper core, rasterizer core, and video engine core are some of the other features of this GPU. 
Technical Features 
CUDA cores: 10,752 
Tensor cores: 336
GPU memory: 48GB
If you are specifically interested in a good GPU for LLM projects, then we recommend you check out The NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3050- one of the best GPU for LLM Project ideas.

Get confident to build end-to-end projects
Access to a curated library of 250+ end-to-end industry projects with solution code, videos and tech support.

5 Best GPUs for Deep Learning
Find below the top five GPU for deep learning examples: 

NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 Ti 
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 Ti is one of the best GPU for deep learning if you are a data scientist that performs deep learning tasks on your machine. Its incredible performance and features make it ideal for powering the most advanced neural networks than other GPUs. Powered by NVIDIA ampere architecture, it provides the fastest speeds possible. With this NVIDIA Geforce RTX GPU, gaming enthusiasts may experience a maximum setting of 4K, ray-traced games at the fastest possible rates, and even 8K NVIDIA DLSS-accelerated gaming on monitors that support 8K 60Hz, as stated in HDMI 2.1.
Technical Features: 
CUDA cores: 10,752 
Memory Bandwidth: 1008 GB/s
GPU memory: 24 GB GDDR memory
EVGA GeForce GTX 1080
EVGA GeForce GTX 1080 is one of the most-advanced GPUs designed to deliver the fastest and most-efficient gaming experiences. Based on NVIDIA’s Pascal architecture, it provides significant improvements in performance, memory bandwidth, and power efficiency. Additionally, it provides cutting-edge visuals and technologies that redefine the PC as the platform for enjoying AAA games and fully utilizing virtual reality via NVIDIA VRWorks. 

Technical Features:
CUDA cores: 2560
GPU memory: 8GB of GDDR5X
Pascal Architecture
ZOTAC GeForce GTX 1070
GeForce GTX 1070 Mini is one of the best GPU for deep learning due to its top-notch specifications, low noise levels, and small size.  The GPU has an HDMI 2.0 connector that you may use to attach your PC to an HDTV or other display device. Additionally, the ZOTAC GeForce GTX 1070 Mini is compatible with NVIDIA G-Sync, which reduces input latency and screen tearing while enhancing speed and smoothness while developing deep learning algorithms.
Technical Features:
CUDA cores: 1,920 cores
GPU memory: 8GB GDDR5
Clock speed: 1518 MHz

GIGABYTE GeForce RTX 3080
The GIGABYTE GeForce RTX 3080 is the best GPU for deep learning since it was designed to meet the requirements of the latest deep learning techniques, such as neural networks and generative adversarial networks. The RTX 3080 enables you to train your models much faster than with a different GPU. The GeForce RTX 3080 also offers a 4K display output, allowing you to connect multiple displays and design neural networks more quickly.
Technical Features
CUDA cores: 10,240
Clock speed: 1,800 MHz
GPU memory: 10 GB of GDDR6

NVIDIA A100
The NVIDIA A100 GPU, built on the Ampere architecture, excels in powering deep learning tasks. It features Tensor Cores for efficient matrix operations, offers high memory capacities, supports NVLink for multi-GPU configurations, and boasts a rich AI software ecosystem. Data centers widely adopt it, and it is compatible with popular frameworks, making it a premier choice for accelerating the training of large neural networks.
Technical Features 
CUDA Cores: 6,912 
Clock Speed: 1.41GHz 
Thermal Design Power (TDP): 400 Watts 
Tensor cores: 432
What makes Python one of the best programming languages for ML Projects? The answer lies in these solved and end-to-end Machine Learning Projects in Python. Check them out now!

5 Best Budget GPU for Deep Learning Examples
Here you will find a few examples of the best budget gpu for AI projects/ Deep Learning Project Ideas:
NVIDIA GTX 1650 Super 
The NVIDIA GTX 1650 Super is one of the budget-friendly GPU offering decent performance for its price. With 4GB of GDDR5 memory and a reasonable number of CUDA cores, it was suitable for smaller deep learning tasks and well-supported by popular frameworks like TensorFlow and PyTorch. Its power efficiency and affordability made it an attractive option for budget-conscious users interested in deep learning or gaming. 
Technical Features: 
CUDA cores: 1280 
GPU memory: 4 GB of GDDR6 VRAM 
Clock Speed: 1520 MHz
GPU Chip: TU116-250 GPU chip 

Turing Architecture 
GTX 1660 Super
One of the greatest low-cost GPUs for deep learning is the GTX 1660 Super. Its performance is not excellent as more costly models because it's an entry-level graphic card for deep learning.
This GPU is the best option for you and your pocketbook if you're just starting with machine learning. 
Technical Features
CUDA Cores: 4352
Memory Bandwidth: 616 GB/s 
Power: 260W
Clock Speed: 1350 MHz

NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti is the ideal GPU for deep learning and ArtificiaI Intelligence, both from a pricing and performance perspective. It has dual HDB fans that provide greater performance cooling, significantly less acoustic noise, and Real-Time Ray Tracing in games for cutting-edge, hyper-realistic visuals. The RTX 2080's blower architecture enables much denser system configurations, including up to four GPUs in a single workstation. In addition, the NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti is a low-cost solution suited best for small-scale modeling workloads than large-scale training developments because of having less GPU memory per card (only 11 GB).
Technical Features
CUDA cores: 4352
Memory Bandwidth: 616 GB/s
Clock Speed: 1350 MHz

NVIDIA Tesla K80
The NVIDIA Tesla K80 is the world’s most popular and budget-friendly GPU that significantly reduces data center costs by offering a great performance boost with fewer, more powerful servers. For example, if you've used Google Colab to train Mask RCNN, you'll have noted that the Nvidia Testa K80 is among the video GPUs that Google makes available. It is ideal for deep learning but isn't the perfect option for deep learning professionals for their projects. 
Technical Features 
CUDA cores: 4992
GPU memory: 24 GB of GDDR5
Memory Bandwidth: 480 GB/s 
EVGA GeForce GTX 1080 
The EVGA GeForce GTX 1080 FTW GAMING Graphics Card, based on NVIDIA's Pascal architecture and equipped with a factory overclocked core, offers significant enhancements in performance, memory bandwidth, and power efficiency over the high-performing Maxwell architecture. Additionally, it provides cutting-edge visuals and technologies that redefine the PC as the platform for enjoying AAA games and entirely using virtual reality with NVIDIA VRWorks. 

Technical Features 
CUDA cores: 2560
GPU memory: 8GB of GDDR5X
Memory Bandwidth: 320 GB/s

Key Takeaways 
The GPU market will continue to grow in the future as we make innovations and breakthroughs in machine learning, deep learning, and HPC. GPU acceleration will always be helpful for students and developers looking to break into this sector, especially as their costs continue to decrease. 
If you are still confused about picking the right GPU for learning machine learning or deep learning, ProjectPro experts are here to help you out. You can also schedule a one-to-one mentoring session with our industry experts to help you pick the right GPU for your next machine learning project while you kickstart your career in machine learning.

Access Data Science and Machine Learning Project Code Examples

FAQs on GPU for Machine Learning 
Which is the top GPU for deep learning?
NVIDIA, the market leader, offers the best deep-learning GPUs in 2022. The top NVIDIA models are Titan RTX, RTX 3090, Quadro RTX 8000, and RTX A6000. 

Can GPUs be used for machine learning?
Yes, GPUs are capable of doing several calculations at the same time. This enables the distribution of training processes, which may significantly speed up machine learning activities. You can build many cores with GPUs that consume fewer resources without losing efficiency or power.

How Many GPUs are Enough For Deep Learning? 
It all depends on the deep learning model being trained, the quantity of data available, and the size of the neural network.

Are Gaming GPUs good for machine learning?
Graphics processing units (GPUs), initially designed for the gaming industry, feature many processing cores and a significant amount of RAM on board.  GPUs are increasingly employed in deep learning applications because they can significantly accelerate neural network training.

About the Author
Nishtha is a professional Technical Content Analyst at ProjectPro with over three years of experience in creating high-quality content for various industries. She holds a bachelor's degree in Electronics and Communication Engineering and is an expert in creating SEO



5 Reasons I’d Buy a 3D Printer This Black Friday
By Anj Bryant published November 22, 2023
It’s the best time to shop for a 3D printer and spark your creativity.

Black Friday sales are here and some of the Best 3D Printers and Best Budget 3D Printers are being offered with great discounts at Amazon, Best Buy, and other major online retail stores. So, if you have been thinking about owning one of these machines for yourself or giving it as a gift to a loved one, now is a good time to take the plunge and take advantage of the savings while it lasts. 
You don’t need to be a master maker or a small business owner to make use of and enjoy printing models or creating DIY projects. It’s been a few years since I embraced the world of 3D printing and not only has it been something that my kids and I bond over, but it has been an essential tool we use throughout the year for printing personalized gifts or making cool gadgets and little trinkets for ourselves. It’s a lot of fun and a money saver. Why buy it when you can make it yourself?
If you are still on the fence about whether you should buy a 3D printer, here are five good reasons why it’s time to take advantage of the best Black Friday 3D printer deals.

1. It’s Cheaper
Yes, there was a time when 3D printers weren’t affordable for the average consumer. However, the cost of desktop 3D printers has become more reasonable these days, presumably to address the growing demand for low-cost options.
The great thing about this is that you can now find 3D printers for less than $200 that are still capable and do not skimp on high-quality features, like the ELegoo Neptune 3 Pro, which remains one of our favorite budget 3D printers and is currently on sale for $199 at Amazon. Or alternatively, the Creality Ender 3 S1 is also on sale right now from a retail price of $429 down to $266. I’ve been using this machine for two years now, and it still turns out great print quality. It’s a reliable workhorse if you don’t mind the sticky build plate. Both 3D printers are on huge Black Friday sales.

Best Black Friday Budget 3D Printer Deals
Elegoo Neptune 3 Pro: now $199 at Amazon (was $269) One of our favorite 3D printers, the Neptune 3 Pro boasts extremely powerful and high-quality features while still maintaining its low-cost value.
Creality Ender 3 S1: now $279 at Amazon (was $429)
This budget-friendly bed slinger offers direct drive, dual Z axis, auto bed leveling, silent stepper motors, a removable flex plate, and a color display screen - perfect for beginners or expert makers.

2. It’s Faster
3D printers have also gotten a lot faster. If you’ve ever waited for over ten hours for a single model to print (like I have), then you know the pain of wasting almost an entire day waiting for your build to finish. So thankfully, there are now 3D printers that can save you time and get back hours of your day. Granted some high speed machines may come at a premium (like the Bamboo Lab P1S on sale for $599 but still quite pricey), but would be well worth the time you save - time is money as the saying goes. And you still come out ahead in the end.
When I first got the Bambu Lab A1 mini, I was so impressed with its speed. It does have a smaller footprint, so if you plan to print larger models this might not be a good fit for you, but the quality of the prints is smooth and comes out almost perfect every time – it’s worth the $299 cost. Another option is the Sovol SV07 which is also a fast machine and on sale for $299. You can check out our 3D Printer Speed Hierarchy for a list of the best speedsters in the market today.

Best Black Friday High-Speed 3D Printer Deals
Bambu Lab A1 Mini: now $299 at Bambu Lab
This bed slinger may come with a small 180x180x180mm build volume but it has an impressive top speed of 500mm/s. Perfect for anyone wanting to print multi-color models without breaking the bank. 

Sovol SV07: now $299 at Amazon (was $399)
The Sovol SV07 can hit 500mm/s speed with an acceleration rate of 8000mm/s, which is way faster than most bed slingers can handle. If you can handle the noise, this speedster is a great get at $100 off MSRP.

3. It’s Easier to Use
We like the process of tinkering and assembling things here at Tom’sHardware, but if you are intimidated with the whole building process or aren’t a fan of putting things together yourself, there are lots of ready-to-use out of the box 3D printers available as well.My first 3D printer from three years ago was the Voxelab Aries. It came shipped fully assembled and ready to print as soon as you take it out of its packaging. This is a great beginner-friendly machine because all you need to do is load your filament and you are ready to go. It retailed for $299 when it was released, and you can find it on sale for $239 today. I’m still using it regularly because it is so easy to use and, since it has the enclosure form factor, it’s safe for my youngest daughter to use as well. Alternatively, the Creality Ender 3 V3 SE is both easy to assemble and an affordable option currently on sale for $199.
Best Black Friday 3D Printer for Beginners Deals

Voxelab Aries: now $239 at Walmart (was $399)
The Voxelab Aries was designed for STEM classrooms. It ships fully assembled and ready to use right out of the box. It's very user-friendly and has Wi-Fi capability but no auto bed leveling. Great for first-time users who don't want to tinker with building the machine.

Creality Ender 3 V3 SE: now $197 at Amazon (was $219)
The Creality Ender V3 SE is simple to build, has deluxe features, and is easy to set up and use - that's everything a novice user needs. Unfortunately, it does not have Wi-Fi.

4.  It's Great Family Fun
It’s so much fun and practical to make things ourselves. Again, why buy it when you can make it yourself? From printing fidget toys to keepsake trinkets and even replacement parts for gadgets around the house – my kids and I have done them all and have enjoyed all the time we spent making and crafting.
It’s awesome to see them inspired and see their creative juices going. As mentioned earlier, Voxelab Aries has an enclosure and thus is a safe choice and recommended for kid use. Another great option is the AOSeed X-Maker which is currently on sale for $319.

Best Black Friday 3D Printer for Kids
AOSeed X-Make: now $319 at Amazon (was $399)
The X-Make is fully enclosed to keep kids and pets from touching it. It comes with an easy-to-use app that has a slew of built-in toy designs kids can choose from. It can also work with standard slicers like Cura.

5. It's a Money Saver / Money Earner
We’ve mentioned that you can save money by making and printing things yourself. But you could also go beyond the personal hobby route and do like what many others have, which is to take their creative passions a step further and use their 3D printers to launch small businesses to make some extra cash. In this economy, it may not be a bad idea.
Depending on the type of business you embark on, you may need higher-end performers that can do the workload you require. You may need something like the Prusa MK4, which is a powerful machine but also tends to be on the pricey side ($1,099 MSRP). It is available as a kit direct from the Prusa Store for $799. An equally capable built-for-volume machine is the Bambu Lab P1P, which is compatible with AMS for multi-color printing and on sale for $539.

Best Black Friday Premium 3D Printer Deal
Bambu Lab P1P: now $539 at Bambu Lab (was $699)
This super-fast Core XY printer is built for complex projects, includes input shaping, and has the option for four-color AMS.

No matter how you plan to use your 3D Printer, we hope we helped you make a more informed decision and saved you money along the way. For more deals on 3D Printers and materials, head on to our Black Friday Best 3D Printer deals page. Happy printing!

Stay on the Cutting Edge
Join the experts who read Tom's Hardware for the inside track on enthusiast PC tech news — and have for over 25 years. We'll send breaking news and in-depth reviews of CPUs, GPUs, AI, maker hardware and more straight to your inbox.

Your Email Address
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.

Anj Bryant is the Assistant Managing Editor at Tom's Hardware. She provides content layout and development support, and coordinates editorial initiatives for all the talented groups of freelancers, contributors, and editors in the team.


Zero-ETL, ChatGPT, And The Future of Data Engineering
The post-modern data stack is coming. Are we ready?
Barr Moses

If you don’t like change, data engineering is not for you. Little in this space has escaped reinvention.
The most prominent, recent examples are Snowflake and Databricks disrupting the concept of the database and ushering in the modern data stack era.
As part of this movement, Fivetran and dbt fundamentally altered the data pipeline from ETL to ELT. Hightouch interrupted SaaS eating the world in an attempt to shift the center of gravity to the data warehouse. Monte Carlo joined the fray and said, “Maybe having engineers manually code unit tests isn’t the best way to ensure data quality.”
Today, data engineers continue to stomp on hard coded pipelines and on-premises servers as they march up the modern data stack slope of enlightenment. The inevitable consolidation and trough of disillusionment appear at a safe distance on the horizon.
And so it almost seems unfair that new ideas are already springing up to disrupt the disruptors:

Zero-ETL has data ingestion in its sights
AI and Large Language Models could transform transformation
Data product containers are eyeing the table’s thrown as the core building block of data

Are we going to have to rebuild everything (again)? The body of the Hadoop era isn’t even all that cold.
The answer is, yes of course we will have to rebuild our data systems. Probably several times throughout our careers. The real questions are the why, when, and the how (in that order).
I don’t profess to have all the answers or a crystal ball. But this article will closely examine some of the most prominent near(ish) future ideas that may become part of the post-modern data stack as well as their potential impact on data engineering.

Practicalities and tradeoffs
The modern data stack didn’t arise because it did everything better than its predecessor. There are real trade-offs. Data is bigger and faster, but it’s also messier and less governed. The jury is still out on cost efficiency.
The modern data stack reigns supreme because it supports use cases and unlocks value from data in ways that were previously, if not impossible, then certainly very difficult. Machine learning moved from buzz word to revenue generator. Analytics and experimentation can go deeper to support bigger decisions.
The same will be true for each of the trends below. There will be pros and cons, but what will drive adoption is how they, or the dark horse idea we haven’t yet discovered, unlock new ways to leverage data. Let’s look closer at each.

Zero-ETL
What it is: A misnomer for one thing; the data pipeline still exists.
Today, data is often generated by a service and written into a transactional database. An automatic pipeline is deployed which not only moves the raw data to the analytical data warehouse, but modifies it slightly along the way.
For example, APIs will export data in JSON format and the ingestion pipeline will need to not only transport the data but apply light transformation to ensure it is in a table format that can be loaded into the data warehouse. Other common light transformations done within the ingestion phase are data formatting and deduplication.
While you can do heavier transformations by hard coding pipelines in Python, and some have advocated for doing just that to deliver data pre-modeled to the warehouse, most data teams choose not to do so for expediency and visibility/quality reasons.
Zero-ETL changes this ingestion process by having the transactional database do the data cleaning and normalization prior to automatically loading it into the data warehouse. It’s important to note the data is still in a relatively raw state.
At the moment, this tight integration is possible because most zero-ETL architectures require both the transactional database and data warehouse to be from the same cloud provider.

Pros: Reduced latency. No duplicate data storage. One less source for failure.
Cons: Less ability to customize how the data is treated during the ingestion phase. Some vendor lock-in.

Who’s driving it: AWS is the driver behind the buzzword (Aurora to Redshift), but GCP (BigTable to BigQuery) and Snowflake (Unistore) all offer similar capabilities. Snowflake (Secure Data Sharing) and Databricks (Delta Sharing) are also pursuing what they call “no copy data sharing.” This process actually doesn’t involve ETL and instead provides expanded access to the data where it’s stored.

Practicality and value unlock potential: On one hand, with the tech giants behind it and ready to go capabilities, zero-ETL seems like it’s only a matter of time. On the other, I’ve observed data teams decoupling rather than more tightly integrating their operational and analytical databases to prevent unexpected schema changes from crashing the entire operation.
This innovation could further lower the visibility and accountability of software engineers toward the data their services produce. Why should they care about the schema when the data is already on its way to the warehouse shortly after the code is committed?
With data steaming and micro-batch approaches seeming to serve most demands for “real-time” data at the moment, I see the primary business driver for this type of innovation as infrastructure simplification. And while that’s nothing to scoff at, the possibility for no copy data sharing to remove obstacles to lengthy security reviews may result in greater adoption in the long-run (although to be clear it’s not an either/or).

One Big Table and Large Language Models
What it is: Currently, business stakeholders need to express their requirements, metrics, and logic to data professionals who then translate it all into a SQL query and maybe even a dashboard. That process takes time, even when all the data already exists within the data warehouse. Not to mention on the data team’s list of favorite activities, ad-hoc data requests rank somewhere between root canal and documentation.
There is a bevy of startups aiming to take the power of large language models like GPT-4 to automate that process by letting consumers “query” the data in their natural language in a slick interface.

At least until our new robot overlords make Binary the new official language.
This would radically simplify the self-service analytics process and further democratize data, but it will be difficult to solve beyond basic “metric fetching,” given the complexity of data pipelines for more advanced analytics.
But what if that complexity was simplified by stuffing all the raw data into one big table?
That was the idea put forth by Benn Stancil, one of data’s best and forward thinking writer/founders. No one has imagined the death of the modern data stack more.
As a concept, it’s not that far-fetched. Some data teams already leverage a one big table (OBT) strategy, which has both proponents and detractors.
Leveraging large language models would seem to overcome one of the biggest challenges of using the one big table, which is the difficulty of discovery, pattern recognition, and its complete lack of organization. It’s helpful for humans to have a table of contents and well marked chapters for their story, but AI doesn’t care.

Pros: Perhaps, finally delivering on the promise of self service data analytics. Speed to insights. Enables the data team to spend more time unlocking data value and building, and less time responding to ad-hoc queries.
Cons: Is it too much freedom? Data professionals are familiar with the painful eccentricities of data (time zones! What is an “account?”) to an extent most business stakeholders are not. Do we benefit from having a representational rather than direct data democracy?

Who’s driving it: Super early startups such as Delphi and GetDot.AI. Startups such as Narrator. More established players doing some version of this such as Amazon QuickSight, Tableau Ask Data, or ThoughtSpot.
Practicality and value unlock potential: Refreshingly, this is not a technology in search of a use case. The value and efficiencies are evident–but so are the technical challenges. This vision is still being built and will need more time to develop. Perhaps the biggest obstacle to adoption will be the infrastructure disruption required, which will likely be too risky for more established organizations.

Data product containers
What it is: A data table is the building block of data from which data products are built. In fact, many data leaders consider production tables to be their data products. However, for a data table to be treated like a product a lot of functionality needs to be layered on including access management, discovery, and data reliability.

Containerization has been integral to the microservices movement in software engineering. They enhance portability, infrastructure abstraction, and ultimately enable organizations to scale microservices. The data product container concept imagines a similar containerization of the data table.
Data product containers may prove to be an effective mechanism for making data much more reliable and governable, especially if they can better surface information such as the semantic definition, data lineage, and quality metrics associated with the underlying unit of data.

Pros: Data product containers look to be a way to better package and execute on the four data mesh principles (federated governance, data self service, treating data like a product, domain first infrastructure).
Cons: Will this concept make it easier or more difficult for organizations to scale their data products? Another fundamental question, which could be asked of many of these futuristic data trends, is do the byproducts of data pipelines (code, data, metadata) contain value for data teams that is worth preserving?

Who’s driving it: Nextdata, the startup founded by data mesh creator Zhamak Dehgahni. Nexla has been playing in this space as well.
Practicality and value unlock potential: While Nextdata has only recently emerged from stealth and data product containers are still evolving, many data teams have seen proven results from data mesh implementations. The future of the data table will be dependent on the exact shape and execution of these containers.

The endless reimagination of the data lifecycle
To peer into the data future, we need to look over our shoulder at the data past and present. Past, present, future — data infrastructures are in a constant state of disruption and rebirth (although perhaps we need some more chaos).
The meaning of data warehouse has changed drastically from the term introduced by Bill Inmon in the 1990s. ETL pipelines are now ELT pipelines. The data lake is not as amorphous as it was just two years ago.
With these innovations ushered in by the modern data stack, data engineers have still played a central, technical role in dictating how data moves and how data consumers access it. But some changes are bigger and scarier than others.
The term zero-ETL seems threatening because it (inaccurately) suggests the death of pipelines, and without pipelines do we need data engineers?
For all the hype behind ChatGPT’s ability to generate code, this process is still very much in the hands of technical data engineers who still need to review and debug. The scary aspect about large language models is how they might fundamentally warp the data pipeline or our relationship with data consumers (and how data is served to them).
However this future, if and when it comes to pass, is still strongly reliant on data engineers.
What has endured since the dawn of time is the general lifecycle of data. It is emitted, it is shaped, it is used, and then it is archived (best to avoid dwelling on our own mortality here).
While the underlying infrastructure may change and automations will shift time and attention to the right or left, human data engineers will continue to play a crucial role in extracting value from data for the foreseeable future.
It’s not because future technologies and innovations can’t simplify the complex data infrastructures of today–it’s because our demand and uses for data will continue to increase in sophistication and scale.
Big data has and always will be a pendulum swinging back and forth. We make a leap forward in capacity and then we just as quickly figure out a way to reach those boundaries until the next leap is required. Take comfort in this cycle–it’s nice to be needed.

Shane Murray co-authored this article. Subscribe to get his stories delivered to your inbox.

Interested in the future of data quality? Reach out to the Monte Carlo Team!

Data Engineering
Data Architecture
Large Language Models
Data Quality
Data Platforms

Written by Barr Moses















