Five soldiers fall in battle in Gaza
Soldiers from Battalion 6623 of the 55th Paratroopers Brigade, the Givati Brigade, and the Nahal Brigade, fall in battle in Gaza.
Israel National News

Four of the five soldiers who fell
IDF spokesperson
The IDF has published the names of five soldiers who fell while fighting in Gaza.

Staff sergeant Nir Rafael Kananian, 20 years old from Beit Keshet, fought in the Givati Brigade and fell Friday in battle in southern Gaza.

Staff sergeant Birhanu Kassie, age 22 from Beit Shemesh, fought in the Givati Brigade and fell Friday in battle in southern Gaza.

Master sergeant (res.) Shay Termin, age 26 from Rosh Pina, fought in Battalion 6623 of the 55th Paratroopers Brigade, and fell in battle in southern Gaza on Friday.

Warrant officer (res.) Alexander Shpits, age 41 from Karmiel, fought in Battalion 6623 of the 55th Paratroopers Brigade, and fell in battle on Friday in southern Gaza.

Captain Oshri Moshe Butzhak, age 22 from Haifa, commander in the Nahal Brigade, fell Saturday in battle in northern Gaza.

On Friday, the IDF cleared for publication on Friday evening that Sergeant Amit Hod Ziv, 19, from Rosh Haayin, fell during operational activity following launches that were carried out from Lebanese territory towards northern Israel.





WSJ: Biden pressured Netanyahu not to launch pre-emptive strike on Hezbollah
Report claims Biden pushed PM Netanyahu not to pre-emptively strike Hezbollah due to fears of 'wider regional war.' Netanyahu: Report is incorrect.

US President Joe Biden urged Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to halt a pre-emptive strike against Hezbollah forces in Lebanon, just after Hamas launched its savage attack on Israel, the Wall Street Journal reported.

The report claimed that Biden warned that a pre-emptive strike on Hezbollah "could spark a wider regional war."

According to WSJ, Israel had intelligence that Hezbollah terrorists were preparing to cross the border as part of a multipronged attack, but the US deemed Israel's intelligence "unreliable." Warplanes in the air awaiting orders were called off their task, WSJ claimed, quoting "people familiar with the call," due to Biden's pressure.

The Prime Minister's Office responded: "This report is incorrect."

"Already on the first day of the war, Prime Minister Netanyahu decided that Israel will act first of all to achieve a decisive victory in the south, while deterring attacks in the north. This policy was adopted by the Cabinet."





Controversial former UNRWA chief to serve as Red Cross Director-General
Red Cross appoints Pierre Krahenbuhl, who resigned as UNRWA chief amid ethical abuse probe, as as its next director-general.

The Red Cross announced on Friday that it has appointed Pierre Krahenbuhl, the former head of the UN agency for “Palestinian refugees” UNRWA, as its next director-general.

In a statement, the Red Cross said that Krahenbuhl “has dedicated more than 30 years to the humanitarian sector, including 25 years in prominent roles at the ICRC in delegations and at headquarters. He is recognized as a strategic and purpose-driven leader with deep organizational experience and dedication to the ICRC.”

Krahenbuhl is slated to commence as director-general of the Red Cross on April 1, 2024, when the current incumbent, Robert Mardini, finishes his four-year mandate.

Krahenbuhl was appointed commissioner-general of UNRWA in 2014. He resigned from that post in 2019, amid an internal probe into alleged mismanagement at the organization.

His resignation came several months after AFP revealed that senior UNRWA officials, including Krahenbuhl, were under investigation for "credible and corroborated" allegations of serious ethical abuses.

Krahenbuhl appointment by the Red Cross comes as the organization continues to be criticized over its failure to visit Israeli hostages being held by Hamas in Gaza.

Red Cross President Mirjana Spoljaric recently visited the Gaza Strip, where she was supposed to coordinate visits by Red Cross personnel to hostages who are being held by Hamas.

However, in a video she released after the visit, Spoljaric barely mentioned the hostages and mostly spoke about the plight of Gazan residents.

Only towards the end of the nearly two-minute video, did the Red Cross chief briefly mentioned the hostages abducted by Hamas during its October 7 attack on Israel.

(Israel National News' North American desk is keeping you updated until the start of Shabbat in New York. The time posted automatically on all Israel National News articles, however, is Israeli time.)





Shtreimel of Rabbi Chaim Kanievsky sold for $1.8 million
Haredi businessman purchases shtreimel given to Rabbi Kanievsky by his father-in-law Rabbi Yosef Shalom Elyashiv at auction house.

A haredi businessman has purchased the shtreimel of the late sage Rabbi Chaim Kanievsky for a whopping $1.8 million.

The businessman made the purchase at an auction house that was selling items that belonged to Rabbi Kanievsky, after bids from other prospective buyers drove up the price significantly.

The shtreimel has a deeper history, as Rabbi Kanievsky inherited it from his father-in-law Rabbi Yosef Shalom Elyashiv, the former leader of the Lithuanian-haredi community in Israel. Rabbi Elyashiv gave him his old shtreimel after buying a new one for himself.

Rabbi Kanievsky would wear the shtreimel while reciting the kiddush and blessing after meals on Jewish holidays.

The price of a new shtreimel, which is often worn by hasidic haredi men after they get married, ranges from NIS 5,000 (about $1,400) to NIS 20,000 (about $5,500), with an average price of NIS 12,000 (about $3,300).























