Genetics From Genes to Genomes

Leland H. Hartwell
FRED HUTCHISON CANCER CENTER
Michael L. Goldberg
CORNELL UNIVERSITY
Janice A. Fischer
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Leroy Hood
THE INSTITUTE FOR SYSTEMS BIOLOGY


GENETICS: FROM GENES TO GENOMES, SIXTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2018 by
McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions
© 2015, 2011, and 2008. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill
Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or
broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Portfolio Manager: Justin K.Wyatt, PhD
Lead Product Developer: Fran Simon
Senior Marketing Manager: Kelly Brown
Senior Content Project Manager: Vicki Krug
Lead Content Project Manager: Christina Nelson
Buyer: Jennifer Pickel
Lead Designer: David Hash
Lead Content Licensing Specialist: Lori Hancock
Content Licensing Specialist: Lori Slattery
Compositor: Aptara, Inc
Printer: LSC Communications
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Hartwell, Leland, author.
Title: Genetics : from genes to genomes / Leland Hartwell, Michael Goldberg,
Janice Fischer, Lee Hood, Charles F. Aquadro, Bruce Bejcek.
Description: Sixth edition. ∣ New York, NY : McGraw-Hill Education, [2018] ∣
Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017017175∣ ISBN 9781259700903 (alk. paper) ∣
ISBN 1259700909 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Genetics.
Classification: LCC QH430 .G458 2018 ∣ DDC 576.5—dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2017017175
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website
does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education
does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.

About the Authors

Dr. Leland Hartwell is President and Director of Seattle’s Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center and Professor of Genome Sciences at the University of Washington.
Dr. Hartwell’s primary research contributions were in identifying genes that control cell division in yeast, including those necessary for the division process as well as those necessary for the
fidelity of genome reproduction. Subsequently, many of these same genes have been found to
control cell division in humans and often to be the site of alteration in cancer cells.
Dr. Hartwell is a member of the National Academy of Sciences and has received the Albert
Lasker Basic Medical Research Award, the Gairdner Foundation International Award, the Genetics
Society Medal, and the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
Dr. Michael Goldberg is a Professor at Cornell University, where he teaches introductory genetics and human genetics. He was an undergraduate at Yale University and received his Ph.D. in
biochemistry from Stanford University. Dr. Goldberg performed postdoctoral research at the
Biozentrum of the University of Basel (Switzerland) and at Harvard University, and he received
an NIH Fogarty Senior International Fellowship for study at Imperial College (England) and fellowships from the Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti for sabbatical work at the University of Rome
(Italy). His current research uses the tools of Drosophila genetics and the biochemical analysis of
frog egg cell extracts to investigate the mechanisms that ensure proper cell cycle progression and
chromosome segregation during mitosis and meiosis.
Dr. Janice Fischer is a Professor at The University of Texas at Austin, where she is an awardwinning teacher of genetics and Director of the Biology Instructional Office. She received her
Ph.D. in biochemistry and molecular biology from Harvard University, and did postdoctoral
research at The University of California at Berkeley and The Whitehead Institute at MIT. In her
research, Dr. Fischer used Drosophila first to determine how tissue-specific transcription works,
and then to examine the roles of ubiquitin and endocytosis in cell signaling during development.
Dr. Lee Hood received an M.D. from the Johns Hopkins Medical School and a Ph.D. in biochemistry from the California Institute of Technology. His research interests include immunology, cancer biology, development, and the development of biological instrumentation (for
example, the protein sequencer and the automated fluorescent DNA sequencer). His early research
played a key role in unraveling the mysteries of antibody diversity. More recently he has pioneered
systems approaches to biology and medicine.
Dr. Hood has taught molecular evolution, immunology, molecular biology, genomics and biochemistry and has co-authored textbooks in biochemistry, molecular biology, and immunology, as
well as The Code of Codes—a monograph about the Human Genome Project. He was one of the
first advocates for the Human Genome Project and directed one of the federal genome centers that
sequenced the human genome. Dr. Hood is currently the president (and co-founder) of the crossdisciplinary Institute for Systems Biology in Seattle, Washington.
Dr. Hood has received a variety of awards, including the Albert Lasker Award for Medical
Research (1987), the Distinguished Service Award from the National Association of Teachers
(1998) and the Lemelson/MIT Award for Invention (2003). He is the 2002 recipient of the Kyoto
Prize in Advanced Biotechnology—an award recognizing his pioneering work in developing the
protein and DNA synthesizers and sequencers that provide the technical foundation of modern
biology. He is deeply involved in K–12 science education. His hobbies include running, mountain
climbing, and reading.


1 Genetics: The Study of Biological
Information 1
PART I
Basic Principles: How Traits Are
Transmitted 14
2 Mendel’s Principles of Heredity 14
3 Extensions to Mendel’s Laws 45
4 The Chromosome Theory of
Inheritance 89
5 Linkage, Recombination, and the Mapping of
Genes on Chromosomes 133
PART II
What Genes Are and What
They Do 181
6 DNA Structure, Replication, and
Recombination 181
7 Anatomy and Function of a Gene:
Dissection Through Mutation 219
8 Gene Expression: The Flow of
Information from DNA to RNA to
Protein 270
PART III
Analysis of Genetic Information 316
9 Digital Analysis of DNA 316
10 Genome Annotation 341
11 Analyzing Genomic Variation 365
PART IV
How Genes Travel on Chromosomes 406
12 The Eukaryotic Chromosome 406
13 Chromosomal Rearrangements and Changes
in Chromosome Number 436
14 Bacterial Genetics 487
15 Organellar Inheritance 521
PART V
How Genes Are Regulated 547
16 Gene Regulation in Prokaryotes 547
17 Gene Regulation in Eukaryotes 583
PART VI
Using Genetics 618
18 Manipulating the Genomes of
Eukaryotes 618
19 The Genetic Analysis of Development 646
20 The Genetics of Cancer 681
PART VII
Beyond the Individual Gene and Genome 713
21 Variation and Selection in Populations 713
22 The Genetics of Complex Traits 746



About the Authors
Preface
Acknowledgements
Introduction: Genetics in the
Twenty-First Century 1
chapter 1
Genetics: The Study of Biological Information 1
1.1 DNA: Life’s Fundamental Information
Molecule 2
1.2 Proteins: The Functional Molecules of Life
Processes 3
1.3 Molecular Similarities of All Life-Forms 4
1.4 The Modular Construction of Genomes 6
1.5 Modern Genetic Techniques 8
1.6 Human Genetics and Society 10
PART I
Basic Principles:
How Traits Are
Transmitted 14
chapter 2
Mendel’s Principles of Heredity 14
2.1 The Puzzle of Inheritance 15
2.2 Genetic Analysis According to Mendel 20
2.3 Mendelian Inheritance in Humans 30
■ Genetics and Society: Developing Guidelines for
Genetic Screening 34
chapter 3
Extensions to Mendel’s Laws 45
3.1 Extensions to Mendel for Single-Gene
Inheritance 46
3.2 Extensions to Mendel for Two-Gene
Inheritance 55
3.3 Extensions to Mendel for Multifactorial
Inheritance 68
■ Genetics and Society: Disease Prevention Versus
the Right to Privacy 72
chapter 4
The Chromosome Theory of Inheritance 89
4.1 Chromosomes: The Carriers of Genes 90
4.2 Sex Chromosomes and Sex
Determination 94
4.3 Mitosis: Cell Division That Preserves
Chromosome Number 98
4.4 Meiosis: Cell Divisions That Halve
Chromosome Number 103
4.5 Gametogenesis 109
4.6 Validation of the Chromosome
Theory 113
4.7 Sex-Linked and Sexually Dimorphic Traits in
Humans 118
■ Genetics and Society: Prenatal Genetic
Diagnosis 93
■ Fast Forward: Transgenic Mice Prove That SRY Is
the Maleness Factor 96
■ Fast Forward: Visualizing X Chromosome
Inactivation in Transgenic Mice 121
chapter 5
Linkage, Recombination, and the Mapping of
Genes on Chromosomes 133
5.1 Gene Linkage and Recombination 134
5.2 Recombination: A Result of Crossing-Over
During Meiosis 138
5.3 Mapping: Locating Genes Along a
Chromosome 143
5.4 The Chi-Square Test and Linkage
Analysis 153
5.5 Tetrad Analysis in Fungi 156
5.6 Mitotic Recombination and Genetic
Mosaics 164
■ Fast Forward: Mapping the Crossovers that
Generate the Chromosomes of Individual Human
Sperm 150
■ Fast Forward: Gene Mapping May Lead to a Cure
for Cystic Fibrosis 152
■ Tools of Genetics: The Chi-Square Test for
Goodness of Fit 155
■ Genetics and Society: Mitotic Recombination and
Cancer Formation 167
Contentsvi Contents
PART III
Analysis of Genetic
Information 316
chapter 9
Digital Analysis of DNA 316
9.1 Fragmenting DNA 317
9.2 Cloning DNA Fragments 322
9.3 Sequencing DNA 327
9.4 Sequencing Genomes 330
■ Tools of Genetics: Serendipity in Science: The
Discovery of Restriction Enzymes 319
chapter 10
Genome Annotation 341
10.1 Finding the Genes in Genomes 342
10.2 Genome Architecture and Evolution 347
10.3 Bioinformatics: Information Technology and
Genomes 354
10.4 A Comprehensive Example: The Hemoglobin
Genes 355
chapter 11
Analyzing Genomic Variation 365
11.1 Variation Among Genomes 366
11.2 Genotyping a Known Disease-Causing
Mutation 371
11.3 Sampling DNA Variation in a Genome 376
11.4 Positional Cloning 380
11.5 The Era of Whole-Genome Sequencing 386
■ Tools of Genetics: The Lod Score Statistic 384
PART IV
How Genes Travel on
Chromosomes 406
chapter 12
The Eukaryotic Chromosome 406
12.1 Chromosomal DNA and Proteins 407
12.2 Chromosome Structure and Compaction 408
PART II
What Genes Are and What
They Do 181
chapter 6
DNA Structure, Replication, and
Recombination 181
6.1 Experimental Evidence for DNA as the Genetic
Material 182
6.2 The Watson and Crick Double Helix Model of
DNA 187
6.3 Genetic Information in Nucleotide
Sequence 193
6.4 DNA Replication 194
6.5 Homologous Recombination at the DNA
Level 201
6.6 Site-Specific Recombination 209
chapter 7
Anatomy and Function of a Gene: Dissection
Through Mutation 219
7.1 Mutations: Primary Tools of Genetic
Analysis 220
7.2 Molecular Mechanisms That Alter DNA
Sequence 225
7.3 DNA Repair Mechanisms 234
7.4 What Mutations Tell Us About Gene
Structure 239
7.5 What Mutations Tell Us About Gene
Function 247
7.6 A Comprehensive Example: Mutations That
Affect Vision 255
■ Fast Forward: Trinucleotide Repeat Diseases:
Huntington Disease and Fragile X Syndrome 229
chapter 8
Gene Expression: The Flow of Information from
DNA to RNA to Protein 270
8.1 The Genetic Code 271
8.2 Transcription: From DNA to RNA 280
8.3 Translation: From mRNA to Protein 289
8.4 Differences in Gene Expression Between
Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes 297
8.5 The Effects of Mutations on Gene Expression
and Function 299
■ Genetics and Society: HIV and Reverse
Transcription 284
PART V
How Genes Are
Regulated 547
chapter 16
Gene Regulation in Prokaryotes 547
16.1 The Elements of Prokaryotic Gene
Expression 548
16.2 Regulation of Transcription Initiation
via DNA-Binding Proteins 549
16.3 RNA-Mediated Mechanisms of Gene
Regulation 562
16.4 Discovering and Manipulating Bacterial Gene
Regulatory Mechanisms 565
16.5 A Comprehensive Example: Control of
Bioluminescence by Quorum Sensing 570
chapter 17
Gene Regulation in Eukaryotes 583
17.1 Overview of Eukaryotic Gene Regulation 584
17.2 Control of Transcription Initiation Through
Enhancers 585
17.3 Epigenetics 594
17.4 Regulation After Transcription 600
17.5 A Comprehensive Example: Sex Determination
in Drosophila 605
■ Tools of Genetics: The Gal4/UASG Binary Gene
Expression System 592
PART VI
Using Genetics 618
chapter 18
Manipulating the Genomes of Eukaryotes 618
18.1 Creating Transgenic Organisms 619
18.2 Uses of Transgenic Organisms 622
12.3 Chromosomal Packaging and Gene
Expression 414
12.4 Replication of Eukaryotic Chromosomes 419
12.5 Chromosome Segregation 423
12.6 Artificial Chromosomes 426
chapter 13
Chromosomal Rearrangements and Changes in
Chromosome Number 436
13.1 Rearrangements of Chromosomal DNA 437
13.2 The Effects of Rearrangements 443
13.3 Transposable Genetic Elements 453
13.4 Aberrations in Chromosome Number:
Aneuploidy 460
13.5 Variation in Number of Chromosome Sets:
Euploidy 465
13.6 Genome Restructuring and Evolution 470
■ Fast Forward: Programmed DNA Rearrangements
and the Immune System 440
chapter 14
Bacterial Genetics 487
14.1 The Enormous Diversity of Bacteria 488
14.2 Bacterial Genomes 490
14.3 Bacteria as Experimental Organisms 495
14.4 Gene Transfer in Bacteria 497
14.5 Using Genetics to Study Bacterial Life 509
14.6 A Comprehensive Example: How
N. gonorrhoeae Became Resistant to
Penicillin 511
■ Genetics and Society: The Human Microbiome
Project 494
chapter 15
Organellar Inheritance 521
15.1 Mitochondria and Their Genomes 522
15.2 Chloroplasts and Their Genomes 525
15.3 The Relationship Between Organellar and
Nuclear Genomes 528
15.4 Non-Mendelian Inheritance of Mitochondria
and Chloroplasts 530
15.5 Mutant Mitochondria and Human
Disease 535
■ Genetics and Society: Mitochondrial DNA Tests as
Evidence of Kinship in Argentine Courts 532
■ Fast Forward: Mitochondrial Eve 536
18.3 Targeted Mutagenesis 627
18.4 Human Gene Therapy 634
■ Tools of Genetics: Cloning by Somatic Cell Nuclear
Transfer 625
■ Tools of Genetics: How Bacteria Vaccinate
Themselves Against Viral Infections with CRISPR/
Cas9 633
■ Genetics and Society: Should We Alter Human
Germ-Line Genomes? 637
chapter 19
The Genetic Analysis of Development 646
19.1 Model Organisms: Prototypes for
Developmental Genetics 647
19.2 Mutagenesis Screens 649
19.3 Determining Where and When Genes Act 654
19.4 Ordering Genes in a Pathway 657
19.5 A Comprehensive Example: Body Plan
Development in Drosophila 659
chapter 20
The Genetics of Cancer 681
20.1 Characteristics of Cancer Cells 682
20.2 The Genetic Basis of Cancers 684
20.3 How Cell Division Is Normally Controlled 687
20.4 How Mutations Cause Cancer
Phenotypes 694
20.5 Personalized Cancer Treatment 699
■ Tools of Genetics: Analysis of Cell-Cycle
Mutants in Yeast 691
PART VII
Beyond the Individual Gene
and Genome 713
chapter 21
Variation and Selection in Populations 713
21.1 The Hardy-Weinberg Law: Predicting Genetic
Variation in “Ideal” Populations 714
21.2 What Causes Allele Frequencies to Change in
Real Populations? 721
21.3 Ancestry and the Evolution of Modern
Humans 731
chapter 22
The Genetics of Complex Traits 746
22.1 Heritability: Genetic Versus Environmental
Influences on Complex Traits 747
22.2 Mapping Quantitative Trait
Loci (QTLs) 757
■ Tools of Genetics: The Chi-Square Test for
Independence 763
Guidelines for Gene Nomenclature A-1
Glossary G-1
Index I-1

Preface
A Note from the Authors
The science of genetics is less than 150 years old, but its
accomplishments within that short time have been astonishing. Gregor Mendel first described genes as abstract
units of inheritance in 1865; his work was ignored and
then rediscovered in 1900. Thomas Hunt Morgan and his
students provided experimental verification of the idea
that genes reside within chromosomes during the years
1910–1920. By 1944, Oswald Avery and his coworkers
had established that genes are made of DNA. James
Watson and Francis Crick published their pathbreaking
structure of DNA in 1953. Remarkably, less than 50 years
later (in 2001), an international consortium of investigators deciphered the sequence of the 3 billion nucleotides in
the human genome. Twentieth century genetics made it
possible to identify individual genes and to understand a
great deal about their functions.
Today, scientists are able to access the enormous
amounts of genetic data generated by the sequencing of
many organisms’ genomes. Analysis of these data will result in a deeper understanding of the complex molecular
interactions within and among vast networks of genes, proteins, and other molecules that help bring organisms to life.
Finding new methods and tools for analyzing these data will
be a significant part of genetics in the twenty-first century.
Our sixth edition of Genetics: From Genes to Genomes
emphasizes both the core concepts of genetics and the
cutting-edge discoveries, modern tools, and analytic methods that will keep the science of genetics moving forward.
The authors of the sixth edition have worked together
in revising every chapter in an effort not only to provide the
most up-to-date information, but also to provide continuity
and the clearest possible explanations of difficult concepts
in one voice.
Our Focus—An Integrated Approach
Genetics: From Genes to Genomes represents a new approach
to an undergraduate course in genetics. It reflects the way
we, the authors, currently view the molecular basis of life.
We integrate:
∙ Formal genetics: the rules by which genes are
transmitted.
∙ Molecular genetics: the structure of DNA and how it
directs the structure of proteins.
∙ Digital analysis and genomics: recent technologies
that allow a comprehensive analysis of the entire gene
set and its expression in an organism.

∙ Human genetics: how genes contribute to health and
diseases, including cancer.
∙ The unity of life-forms: the synthesis of information
from many different organisms into coherent models.
∙ Molecular evolution: the molecular mechanisms by
which biological systems, whole organisms, and
populations have evolved and diverged.
The strength of this integrated approach is that students
who complete the book will have a strong command of
genetics as it is practiced today by both academic and corporate researchers. These scientists are rapidly changing
our understanding of living organisms, including ourselves.
Ultimately, this vital research may create the ability to replace or correct detrimental genes—those “inborn errors of
metabolism,” as researcher Archibald Garrod called them
in 1923, as well as the later genetic alterations that lead to
the many forms of cancer.
The Genetic Way of Thinking
Modern genetics is a molecular-level science, but an understanding of its origins and the discovery of its principles is
a necessary context. To encourage a genetic way of thinking, we begin the book by reviewing Mendel’s principles
and the chromosomal basis of inheritance. From the outset,
however, we aim to integrate organism-level genetics with
fundamental molecular mechanisms.
Chapter 1 presents the foundation of this integration by summarizing the main biological themes we
explore. In Chapter 2, we tie Mendel’s studies of pea
trait inheritance to the actions of enzymes that determine whether a pea is round or wrinkled, yellow or
green, etc. In the same chapter, we point to the relatedness of the patterns of heredity in all organisms.
Chapters 3–5 cover extensions to Mendel, the chromosome theory of inheritance, and the fundamentals of
gene linkage and mapping. Starting in Chapter 6, we
focus on the physical characteristics of DNA, on mutations, and on how DNA encodes, copies, and transmits
biological information.
Beginning in Chapter 9, we move into the digital revolution in DNA analysis with a look at modern genetics
techniques, including gene cloning, PCR, microarrays, and
high-throughput genome sequencing. We explore how
bioinformatics, an emergent analytical tool, can aid in discovery of genome features. This section concludes in
Chapter 11 with case studies leading to the discovery of
human disease genes
The understanding of molecular and computer-based
techniques carries into our discussion of chromosome specifics in Chapters 12–15, and also informs our analysis of
gene regulation in Chapters 16 and 17. Chapter 18 describes
the most recent technology that scientists can use to manipulate genomes at will – for research and practical purposes including gene therapy. Chapter 19 describes the use
of genetic tools at the molecular level to uncover the complex interactions of eukaryotic development. In Chapter
20, we explain how our understanding of genetics and the
development of molecular genetic technologies is enabling
us to comprehend cancer and in some cases to cure it.
Chapters 21 and 22 cover population genetics, with a
view of how molecular tools have provided information
on species relatedness and on genome changes at the
molecular level over time. In addition, we explain how
bioinformatics can be combined with population genetics
to understand inheritance of complex traits and to trace
human ancestry.
Throughout our book, we present the scientific reasoning of some of the ingenious researchers of the field—from
Mendel, to Watson and Crick, to the collaborators on the
Human Genome Project. We hope student readers will see
that genetics is not simply a set of data and facts, but also a
human endeavor that relies on contributions from exceptional individuals.
Student-Friendly Features
As digital components of the text become more and more
crucial, we are very excited that Janice Fischer, a textbook
author, is taking on a dual role as Digital Editor! Janice will
ensure the important consistency between text and digital.
We have taken great pains to help the student make the
leap to a deeper understanding of genetics. Numerous
features of this book were
developed with that goal in
mind.
∙ One Voice Genetics:
Genes to Genomes has a
friendly, engaging
reading style that helps
students master the
concepts throughout this
book. The writing style
provides the student
with the focus and
continuity required to
make the book
successful in the
classroom.
∙ Visualizing
Genetics The highly
specialized art program
developed for this book
integrates photos and line art in a manner that provides
the most engaging visual presentation of genetics
available. Our Feature Figure illustrations break down
complex processes into step-by-step illustrations that
lead to greater student understanding. All illustrations
are rendered with a consistent color theme—for
example, all presentations of phosphate groups are the
same color, as are all presentations of mRNA.
∙ Accessibility Our intention is to bring cutting-edge
content to the student level. A number of more
complex illustrations are revised and segmented to
help the student follow the process. Legends have been
streamlined to highlight only the most important ideas,
and throughout the book, topics and examples have
been chosen to focus on the most critical information.
∙ Problem Solving Developing strong problem-solving
skills is vital for every genetics student. The authors
have carefully created problem sets at the end of each
chapter that allow students to improve upon their
problem-solving ability.
∙ Solved Problems These cover topical material with
complete answers provide insight into the step-by-step
process of problem solving.
∙ Review Problems More than 700 questions involving
a variety of levels of difficulty that develop excellent
problem-solving skills. The problems are organized by
chapter section and in order of increasing difficulty
within each section for ease of use by instructors and
students. The companion online Study Guide and
Solutions Manual, completely revised for the 6th
edition by Michael Goldberg and Janice Fischer,
provides detailed analysis of strategies to solve all of
the end-of-chapter problems.

I. The following figure shows a screen shot from the
UCSC Genome Browser, focusing on a region of the human genome encoding a gene called MFAP3L. (Note:
hg38 refers to version 38 of the human genome RefSeq.)
If you do not remember how the browser represents the
genome, refer to the key at the bottom of Fig. 10.3.
Source: University of California Genome Project, https://genome.ucsc.edu
a. Describe in approximate terms the genomic location of MFAP3L.
b. Is the gene transcribed in the direction from the
centromere-to-telomere or from the telomere-tocentromere?
c. How many alternative splice forms of MFAP3L
mRNA are indicated by the data?

b. The arrows within the introns of the gene show that
the direction of transcription is from the telomere of
4q toward the centromere of chromosome 4.
c. The data indicate four alternatively spliced forms of
the mRNA. In the following parts, we list these as A
to D from top to bottom.
d. The data suggest two promoters. One is roughly at position 170,037,000 and allows the transcription of a
primary RNA alternatively spliced to produce
mRNAs B and D. The other is roughly at position
170,013,000 and leads to the transcription of a primary RNA alternatively spliced to generate mRNAs
A and C.
e. The data indicate that the MFAP3 gene can encode
two different but closely related proteins. mRNAs A,
B, and C all encode the same protein; mRNA D a
slightly larger protein that includes at its N terminus
additional amino acids not found in the other protein.
Otherwise these two proteins appear to be the same.
The ORF that encodes the A B C protein form is
about 880 bp long (a rough estimate); this corresponds to about (880/3 = 293 amino acids). The D
protein is about 50 amino acids longer.
II. Two parents from Southeast Asia have a stillborn

Changes in the 6th Edition:
A Chapter-by-Chapter Summary

The sixth edition has been revised and modernized significantly as compared with the fifth edition. We scrutinized the
entire text and clarified the language wherever possible. In
total, we created more than 50 new Figures and Tables, and
revised more than 100 in addition. We also wrote more than
125 new end-of-chapter problems, and revised many other
problems for clarity. The entire Solutions Manual and Study
Guide was corrected and revised for clarity. We added several new Fast Forward, Genetics and Society, and Tools of
Genetics Boxes on modern topics. Chapter 9 in the 5th edition was split into two separate chapters in the 6th edition:
Chapter 9 (Digital Analysis of DNA) and Chapter 10
(Genome Annotation).
Along with the numerous text changes, the authors have
also spent a great deal of time updating the test bank and
question bank content to align more closely to the text.
There will also be new video tutorials for difficult concepts
in every chapter!
Every chapter of the sixth edition was improved significantly from the fifth edition. The most important changes in
the sixth edition are summarized below:
Chapter 3 Extensions to Mendel’s Laws
∙ Relationship between epistasis and complementation
explained more clearly.
∙ Discussion of two-gene versus multifactorial
inheritance now separated for clarity.
∙ Comprehensive Example about dog coat colors
expanded to include molecular explanations for the
various gene activities.
Chapter 4 The Chromosome Theory of Inheritance
∙ Figures and text altered to clarify that each chromatid
has a centromere.
∙ New Fast Forward Box: Visualizing X Chromosome
Inactivation in Transgenic Mice
Chapter 5 Linkage, Recombination, and the Mapping of
Genes on Chromosomes
∙ New Fast Forward Box: Mapping the Crossovers that
Generate Individual Human Sperm
Chapter 6 DNA Structure, Replication, and Recombination
∙ Improvements to diagrams of DSB repair model of
recombination.
∙ New section about site-specific recombination.
Chapter 7 Anatomy and Function of Gene: Dissection
Through Mutation
∙ Reorganized and clarified material to separate the
discussion of DNA sequence alteration mechanisms
from DNA repair mechanisms.
Chapter 9 Digital Analysis of DNA
∙ Improved depiction of plasmid cloning vectors.
∙ Renovated explanation of paired-end whole-genome
shotgun sequencing.
Chapter 10 Genome Annotation
∙ Improved depiction of alternative RNA splicing.
∙ New illustration of consensus amino acid sequences
in proteins.
∙ New material on the evolution of de novo genes.
Chapter 12 The Eukaryotic Chromosome
∙ New material on synthetic yeast chromosomes.
Chapter 15 Organellar Inheritance
∙ New Fast Forward Box about the Mitchondrial Eve
concept.
Chapter 17 Gene Regulation in Eukaryotes
∙ New Tools of Genetics Box: The Gal4/UASG Binary
Gene Expression System
∙ New part of Epigenetics section: Can
Environmentally Acquired Traits Be Inherited?
∙ New part of Regulation After Transcription section:
Trans-acting Proteins Regulate Translation
Chapter 18 Manipulating the Genomes of Eukaryotes
∙ New part of Targeted Mutagenesis section: CRISPR/
Cas9 Allows Targeted Gene Editing in Any Organism
∙ New Tools of Genetics Box: How Bacteria Vaccinate
Themselves Against Viral Infections with CRISPR/Cas9
∙ New Genetics and Society Box: Should We Alter the
Genomes of Human Germ Lines?
Chapter 19 The Genetic Analysis of Development
∙ Comprehensive Example of Drosophila body
patterning revised to clarify that homeotic genes
function within parasegments, and to clarify the
concept of a morphogen.
Chapter 20 The Genetics of Cancer
∙ Clarified the fact that mutation drives cancer
progression.
∙ Improved explanation of driver and passenger mutations.
∙ Increased coverage of tumor genome sequencing and
the heterogeneity of mutations in different individuals
with cancers in the same organ.
Chapter 22 The Genetics of Complex Traits
∙ Revised the section on heritability to clarify: lines of
correlation and correlation coefficients; how to use
different kinds of human twin studies to estimate the
heritability of complex quantitative traits and complex
discrete traits.
∙ New explanation of how to use the chi-square test for
independence for GWAS.

McGraw-Hill Connect® is a highly reliable, easy-touse homework and learning management solution
that utilizes learning science and award-winning
adaptive tools to improve student results.
Homework and Adaptive Learning
Connect’s assignments help students
contextualize what they’ve learned through
application, so they can better understand the
material and think critically.
▪ Connect will create a personalized study path
customized to individual student needs through
SmartBook®.
▪ SmartBook helps students study more efficiently
by delivering an interactive reading experience
through adaptive highlighting and review.
Over 7 billion questions have been
answered, making McGraw-Hill
Education products more intelligent,
reliable, and  precise.Using Connect improves retention
rates by 19.8%, passing rates by
12.7%, and exam scores by 9.1%.
73% of instructors
who use Connect
require it; instructor
satisfaction increases
by 28% when
Connect is required.
Quality Content and Learning Resources
Connect content is authored by the world’s best subject
matter experts, and is available to your class through a
simple and intuitive interface.
▪ The Connect eBook makes it easy for students to
access their reading material on smartphones
and tablets. They can study on the go and don’t
need internet access to use the eBook as a
reference, with full functionality.
▪ Multimedia content such as videos, simulations,
and games drive student engagement and critical
thinking skills.
Robust Analytics and Reporting
Connect Insight® generates easy-to-read
reports on individual students, the class as a
whole, and on specific assignments.
▪ The Connect Insight dashboard delivers data
on performance, study behavior, and effort.
Instructors can quickly identify students who
struggle and focus on material that the class
has yet to master.
▪ Connect automatically grades assignments
and quizzes, providing easy-to-read reports
on individual and class performance.

More students earn
As and Bs when they
use Connect.Trusted Service and Support
▪ Connect integrates with your LMS to provide single sign-on and automatic syncing
of grades. Integration with Blackboard®, D2L®, and Canvas also provides automatic
syncing of the course calendar and assignment-level linking.
▪ Connect offers comprehensive service, support, and training throughout every
phase of your implementation.
▪ If you’re looking for some guidance on how to use Connect, or want to learn
tips and tricks from super users, you can find tutorials as you work. Our Digital
Faculty Consultants and Student Ambassadors offer insight into how to achieve
the results you want with Connect.
Guided Tour
Integrating Genetic Concepts Genetics: From Genes to Genomes takes an integrated approach in its presentation of genetics, thereby giving students a
strong command of genetics as it is practiced today by academic and corporate researchers. Principles are related throughout the text in examples, essays, case histories, and connections sections to make sure students fully understand the relationships between topics.
Chapter Outline
Every chapter opens with a brief outline
of the chapter contents
chapter outline
•   18.1 Creating Transgenic Organisms
•   18.2 Uses of Transgenic Organisms
•   18.3 Targeted Mutagenesis
•   18.4 Human Gene Therapy
Learning Objectives Learning Objectives appear before each section, and are carefully written to clearly outline expectations
Uses of Transgenic Organisms
learning objectives
1. Describe how transgenes can clarify which gene
causes a mutant phenotype.
2. Summarize the use of transgene reporter constructs in
gene expression studies.
3. Discuss examples of how transgenic organisms serve
to produce proteins needed for human health.
4. List examples of GM organisms and discuss the pros
and cons of their production.
5. Explain the use of transgenic animals to model
gain-of-function genetic diseases in humans
essential concepts
•	 A wild-type transgene can be inserted into an embryo
homozygous for a recessive mutant allele. If the normal
phenotype is restored, then the transgene identifies the
gene that was mutated.
•	 The creation of reporter constructs allows easy detection
of when and in which tissues a gene is turned on or
turned off in eukaryotes.
•	 Transgenic organisms produce medically important
human proteins including insulin, blood clotting factors,
and erythropoietin; transgenic crop plants can potentially
make ingestible vaccines.
•	 GM soybeans are resistant to the weed killer glyphosate.
Many crops, such as corn, soybean, canola, and cotton
have been genetically modified to express Bt protein
which discourages insect predation.
•	 Adding a transgene that carries a disease-causing, gainof-function allele to a nonhuman animal model allows
researchers to observe disease progression and to test
possible therapeutic interventions
Essential Concepts
After each section, the most relevant points of content are
now provided in concise, bulleted statements to reinforce
crucial concepts and learning objectives for students

Manipulation of the genome is the basis for many of the experimental strategies we will describe in Chapter 19, where
we discuss how genetic analysis has been a crucial tool in
unraveling the biochemical pathways of development—the
process by which a single-celled zygote becomes a complex multicellular organism. Transgenic technology is
key to cloning the genes identified in mutant screens that
are crucial for regulating development, and also to manipulating these genes in order to understand their precise functions in the organism
What’s Next
Each chapter closes with a What’s
Next section that serves as a bridge
between the topics in the chapter just
completed to those in the upcoming
chapter or chapters. This spirals the
learning and builds connections for
students
New! Exciting Revised Content
Every chapter of the sixth edition has been revised and modernized significantly as compared with the fifth edition. More than 50 new
Figures and Tables were created, and more than 100 were revised. More than 125 new end-of-chapter problems were written, and
many more revised for clarity. The entire Solutions Manual and Study Guide was updated, corrected, and revised by Michael Goldberg
and Janice Fischer. Several new Fast Forward, Genetics and Society, and Tools of Genetics Boxes covering modern topics were created. For breadth and clarity, Chapter 9 in the 5th edition was split into two separate chapters in the 6th edition: Chapter 9 (Digital
Analysis of DNA) and Chapter 10 (Genome Annotation).
Figure 6.30 One site-specific recombination mechanism. The Cre and Flp enzymes discussed in the text function as shown. The
red and blue target DNA sequences are identical to each other but are represented in different colors for clarity. These targets are
embedded in different DNA molecules (black and gray dots). The subunits of the recombinase tetramer are yellow ovals; this enzyme
catalyzes all steps of the reaction. Black triangles are sites where recombinase cleaves single-stranded DNA. Note that resolution of the
Holliday junction intermediate involves cleavage of the blue and red DNA strands that were not cleaved initially
 Genome editing by CRISPR/Cas9. The sgRNA sequence is designed to bring the Cas9 endonuclease to a specific
target in the genome. Repair after Cas9 cleavage can result in a knockout or a knockin, depending on whether or not a DNA fragment
suitable for homologous recombination is introduced. NHEJ: nonhomologous end-joining.
Visualizing X Chromosome Inactivation in Transgenic Mice

Scientists have recently used molecular techniques and transgenic technology (similar to that described in the earlier Fast
Forward Box Transgenic Mice Prove That SRY Is the Maleness
Factor) to visualize the pattern of X chromosome inactivation in
mice. The researchers generated XX mice containing two different transgenes (in this case, genes from a different species).
One of these transgenes was a jellyfish gene that specifies
green fluorescent protein (GFP); the other was a gene from red
coral that makes red fluorescent protein (RFP) (Fig. A).
In the XX mice, the GFP gene is located on the X chromosome from the mother, and the RFP gene resides on the X
chromosome from the father. Clonal patches of cells are either green or red depending on which X chromosome was
turned into a Barr body in the original cell that established the
patch (Fig. B).
Different XX mice display different green and red patchwork
patterns, providing a clear demonstration of the random nature of
X chromosome inactivation. The patchwork patterns reflect the
cellular memory of which X chromosome was inactivated in the
founder cell for each clonal patch. Geneticists currently use these
transgenic mice to decipher the genetic details of how cells
“remember” which X to inactivate after each cell division.
FA S T F O R WA R D
Visualizing X Chromosome Inactivation in Transgenic Mice
Figure B Heart cells of a transgenic mouse reveal a 
clonal patchwork of X inactivation. Patches of red or
green cells represent cellular descendants of the founders
that randomly inactivated one of their X chromosomes.

Figure A Cells of transgenic mice glow either green  
or red in response to X chromosome inactivation. The
mouse carries a green (GFP) transgene inserted in the maternal
X chromosome (XM), and a red (RFP) transgene in the paternal
X chromosome (XP). Cells in which XP is inactivated (top) glow
green; cells glow red (bottom) when XM is inactivated.
Fast Forward
This feature is one of the methods used to integrate the Mendelian principles introduced early
in the content with the molecular content that
will follow.
How Bacteria Vaccinate Themselves Against Viral
Infections with CRISPR/Cas9
Researchers discovered clustered sequence repeats (CRISPRs)
in bacterial genomes as early as 1987. When in 2005 some of
these sequences were found to originate from bacteriophage
genomes, several astute scientists speculated that CRISPRs
might mediate a viral immunity system in bacteria. These ideas
were largely ignored for several more years until the mechanism of resistance became clarified. And finally, in 2012–2013,
the so-called CRISPR craze reached its full bloom when researchers including Feng Zhang, Jennifer Doudna, and
Emmanuelle Charpentier developed methods to adapt this viral
immunity system to engineer genomes in bacterial cells and in
eukaryotic organisms.
At the CRISPR locus of bacterial genomes, short direct repeats are interrupted at regular intervals by unique spacer sequences (Fig. A). The spacer sequences are fragments of
bacteriophage genomes captured by the host cell and integrated into the host genome by the action of two bacterially
encoded Cas proteins (Cas1 and Cas2). The repeats within the
CRISPR arrays are added by these endonucleolytic enzymes
during the capture and integration process.
Viral immunity results from steps that begin with transcription of the CRISPR array into long RNA molecules called
pre-crRNAs that are processed into short (24–48 nt) socalled CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs). In the bacterial species
Tools of
Genetics Essays
Current readings explain
various techniques and
tools used by geneticists,
including examples of
applications in biology
and medicine.
The Human Microbiome Project
Established in 2008 and funded by the U.S. National Institutes
of Health, The Human Microbiome Project (HMP, Fig. A) is one
of several international consortia aiming to understand the complex relationship between our bodies and the trillions of microorganisms that inhabit them.
The HMP has already achieved its first goal of describing
the diversity of the organisms that make up the human microbiome. Investigators analyzed the microbial metagenomes located at several different sites in the bodies of more than
250 people from around the globe. These studies focused on
the sequence of the gene encoding the 16S rRNA of the ribosomal small subunit of these bacteria, because these sequences
diverge substantially in different bacterial species and thus
serve as markers for those species. The results showed that a
single person can harbor up to 1000 different bacterial species,
but people vary widely in the types of bacteria that make up
their microbiome. Thus, it appears that worldwide more than
10,000 different bacterial species colonize human bodies. The
researchers of the HMP have already sequenced the complete
genomes of many of these kinds of bacteria.
The second phase of the HMP began in 2014, and is
aimed ultimately at determining whether changes in the microbiome are the causes or effects of diseases or other important traits in humans. Diseases potentially linked to the
microbiome include cancer, acne, psoriasis, diabetes, obesity,
and inflammatory bowel disease; some investigators have
suggested that the composition of microbiomes could also
influence the mental health of their hosts. The first step in
these studies will be to establish whether statistical correlations exist between specific kinds of microbial communities
and disease states. As one example, one HMP phase II project currently underway is an analysis of vaginal host cells and
microbes during pregnancy. Approximately 2000 pregnant
women will be studied and their birth outcomes recorded.
The goal of this project is to determine if changes in the microbiome correlate with premature birth or other complications of pregnancy.
Of course, the existence of any correlations found between
microbiomes and disease does not prove cause or effect. But
even if bacteria correlated with a disease state do not cause the
disease, the existence of the correlation could be useful as a
way to diagnose certain conditions. Nevertheless, the most 
an effect? One method is to investigate in detail how the biological properties of the microbiome and the host might be
changed by the interactions of bacteria and the humans they
colonize. Thus, scientists will characterize whether and how the
transcriptomes and proteomes of the bacteria and human cells
are changed by bacterial colonization of human organs. These
studies will further delve into metabolomics (characterizing metabolites in the human bloodstream).
A second and even more powerful method for establishing the cause and effect of microbiome changes is the use of
germ-free mice raised in sterile environments. Surprisingly,
germ-free mice can survive although they are not normal: they
have altered immune systems, poor skin, and they need to eat
more calories than do normal mice to maintain a normal body
weight. Researchers can populate germ-free mice with a single bacterial species or a complex microbial community, and
thus determine how microbiomes influence physiological
states. Problem 8 at the end of this chapter will allow you to
explore this approach by discussing an experiment recently
performed with germ-free mice that asks if the microbiome
plays a causal role in obesity.
If microbial communities indeed contribute to disease
states in humans, then future treatments might aim to alter
resident microbiomes. Thus, the flip side of the HMP is to 
Visualizing Genetics
Full-color illustrations and photographs bring the printed word to life. These visual reinforcements support and further
clarify the topics discussed throughout the text. 6.2 The Watson and C
The Double Helix Structure of DNA
(a) Watson and Crick took the known facts about DNA’s chemical composition and its physical arrangement in space and
constructed a wire-frame model that could explain the molecule’s function.
(b) In the model, two DNA chains spiral around an axis with
the sugar-phosphate backbones on the outside and flat
pairs of bases meeting in the middle. One chain runs 5′
to 3′ upward, while the other runs in the opposite direction of 5′ to 3′ downward. In short, the two chains are
antiparallel. The two chains wrap around each other
once every 10 base pairs, or once every 34 Å. The result
is a double helix that looks like a twisted ladder with the
two spiraling structural members composed of sugarphosphate backbones and the perpendicular rungs consisting of base pairs.
(c) In a space-filling representation of
the model, the overall shape is that
of a grooved cylinder with a diameter of 20 Å. The backbones spiral
around the axis of the double helix
like threads on a screw. Because
two backbones exist, there are two
threads, and these two threads are
vertically displaced from each other.
This displacement of the backbones
generates two grooves, one (the
major groove) much wider than the
other (the minor groove).
The two chains of the double helix
are held together by hydrogen
bonds between complementary
base pairs, A–T and G–C. The spatial requirements of the double helix
require that each base pair must
consist of one small pyrimidine and
one large purine, and even then,
only for the particular pairings of A–T
and G–C. In contrast, A–C and G–T
pairs do not fit well and cannot easily
form hydrogen bonds. Although any
one nucleotide pair forms only two
or three hydrogen bonds, the sum of
these connections between successive base pairs in a long DNA molecule composed of thousands of
nucleotides is a key to the molecule’s
great chemical stability.
Feature Figures
Special multipage spreads integrate line art, photos,
and text to summarize in detail important genetic
concepts
Pour heated molten agarose into a clear acrylic plate
to which a comb has been attached with clamps.
Allow the agarose to cool and harden.
2. Remove the comb; shallow wells will be left in the gel. Remove the
gel from the acrylic plate and transfer it to a tank containing a buered
solution. Use a micropipette to load a dierent DNA sample into each
well of the gel. Each sample contains a blue dye to make it easier to
see. One sample should contain DNA molecules of known length to
serve as size markers.
5. Expose the gel to ultraviolet (UV) light. DNA molecules will fluoresce
as orange bands because the ethidium bromide bound to the
DNA absorbs UV photons and gives o photons in the visible red
range. You can estimate the size of the DNA molecules in the
unknown samples by comparing their migration in the gel with that
of the size markers (standards) in the lane at the left.
3. The tank contains electrode wires placed along each end
of the gel. Attach these electrodes to a power supply.
When you switch on the current, the negatively charged
DNA molecules in each sample migrate toward the “+”
end of the box, along the paths (lanes) shown by the
orange arrows. Smaller DNA molecules will move faster
toward the “+” end than larger DNA molecules.

Separating DNA molecules according to their size by agarose gel electrophoresis. To prepare an agarose gel with wells for
samples, you pour the gel as shown in Step 1. You then transfer the gel to a tank containing a buffered solution with ions that allow current
to flow, and load DNA samples in the wells (Step 2). You then connect the gel tank to a power supply and allow electrophoresis to run from 1
to 20 hours (depending on the DNA size and the voltage; Step 3). After incubating the gel with the fluorescent dye ethidium bromide (Step 4),
you then expose the gel to UV light (Step 5). DNA molecules will appear as orange bands because they bind to the fluorescent dye.
Step 5 shows actual results from gel electrophoresis; because black-and-white film was used, DNA appears white rather than
orange. The standard lane at left has DNA fragments of known sizes. Human genomic DNA was cut with EcoRI in lane A and with RsaI
in lane B. Smears containing hundreds of thousands of fragments are produced with an average size of about 4.1 kb for EcoRI and
256 bp for RsaI. In C, D, and E, the chromosome of bacteriophage λ was cut with HindIII, EcoRI, and RsaI, respectively. The sizes of
the fragments in any one lane add up to 48.5 kb, the size of the viral genome. In F, G, and H plasmid DNA of total length 6.9 kb was
cut with the same three enzymes. Note that the larger the genome analyzed, the more fragments are produced; moreover, the more
bases in the restriction enzyme recognition site, the larger is the average size of the fragments produced
 Remove the gel from the tank. Incubate in a solution
containing ethidium bromide (which binds to DNA),
then wash with water to remove excess dye from the gel.
 Expose the gel to ultraviolet (UV) light. DNA molecules will fluoresce
as orange bands because the ethidium bromide bound to the
DNA absorbs UV photons and gives o photons in the visible red
range. You can estimate the size of the DNA molecules in the
unknown samples by comparing their migration in the gel with that
of the size markers (standards) in the lane at the left.
Process Figures
Step-by-step descriptions allow the student to walk through a
compact summary of important details
Prophase: (1) Chromosomes condense and
become visible; (2) centrosomes move apart
toward opposite poles and generate new
microtubules; (3) nucleoli begin to disappear.
Astral microtubules
Kinetochore
Kinetochore
microtubules
Polar
microtubules
(b) Prometaphase: (1) Nuclear envelope breaks
down; (2) microtubules from the centrosomes
invade the nucleus; (3) sister chromatids attach
to microtubules from opposite centrosomes.
Metaphase
plate
(c) Metaphase: Chromosomes align on the
metaphase plate with sister chromatids facing
opposite poles.
Separating sister
chromatids
(d) Anaphase: (1) The connection between the
centromeres of the sister chromatids is severed;
(2) the now separated sister chromatids move to
opposite poles.
Nucleoli reappear
Re-forming
nuclear envelope
Chromatin
(e) Telophase: (1) Nuclear membranes and
nucleoli re-form; (2) spindle fibers disappear;
(3) chromosomes uncoil and become a tangle
of chromatin.
Comparative Figures
Comparison illustrations lay out the basic
differences of often confusing principles
Genomic DNA from a woman’s blood cells is PCR
amplified by a single pair of primers representing a
unique locus in the genome. The PCR products are
then sequenced by the Sanger method, using one of the
PCR primers as a sequencing primer. The following
figure shows a trace of just part of the sequence read
In an F1 hybrid plant, the allele for round peas (R) is found on
one chromosome, and the allele for wrinkled peas (r) is on the
homologous chromosome. The pairing between the two
homologous chromosomes during prophase through
metaphase of meiosis I makes sure that the homologs will
separate to opposite spindle poles during anaphase I. At the
end of meiosis II, two types of gametes have been produced:
half have R, and half have r, but no gametes have both alleles.
Thus, the separation of homologous chromosomes at meiosis I
corresponds to the segregation of alleles. As the Punnett
square shows, fertilization of 50% R and 50% r eggs with the
same proportion of R and r sperm leads to Mendel’s 3:1 ratio in
the F2 generation.
One pair of homologous chromosomes carries the gene for
seed shape (alleles R and r). A second pair of homologous
chromosomes carries the gene for seed color (alleles Y and y).
Each homologous pair aligns at random at the metaphase plate
during meiosis I, independently of the other homologous pair.
Thus, two equally likely configurations are possible for the
migration of any two chromosome pairs toward the poles
during anaphase I. As a result, a dihybrid individual will
generate four equally likely types of gametes with regard to
the two traits in question. The Punnett square affirms that
independent assortment of traits carried by nonhomologous
chromosomes produces Mendel’s 9:3:3:1 ratio.

What kind of polymorphism is most likely represented?
b. With your answer to part (a) in mind, determine the
woman’s genotype at this locus. Indicate all nucleotides that can be read from both alleles and their
5′-to-3′ orientation.
c. What kind of molecular event was likely to have generated this polymorphism?
d. How would you know exactly where in the genome
this locus is found?
e. What is another way in which you could analyze the
PCR products to genotype this locus?
f. Suppose you wanted to genotype this locus based on
single-molecule DNA sequencing of whole genomes
as shown in Fig. 9.24. Would a single read suffice for
genotyping the locus by this alternative method?

Answer
To solve this problem, you need to understand that PCR will
simultaneously amplify both copies of a locus (one on the maternally derived chromosome and one on the paternally
derived chromosome), as long as the primer can hybridize to
both homologs as is usually the case. The DNA sequence
trace has two nucleotides at several positions. This fact indicates that the woman must be a heterozygote and that the
PCR is amplifying both alleles of the locus.
a. Notice that both alleles contain multiple repeats of
the dinucleotide CA. The most likely explanation
for the polymorphism is therefore that the locus
contains an SSR polymorphism whose alleles have
different numbers of CA repeats. One allele has
six repeats; the second allele must have more
CA units.
b. Writing out the first 14 nucleotides of both alleles is
straightforward. If the assumption in part (a) is correct, then one allele should have more than six CA
repeats. The trace shows evidence for two additional
CA repeats in one allele at positions 15–18, for a total of eight CA repeats.
You can then determine the nucleotides beyond
the repeats in the shorter allele by subtracting CACA
from positions 15–18. The remaining peaks at these
positions correspond to ATGT. Note that ATGT can
also be found in the longer allele, but now at nucleotides 19–22, just past the two additional CACA repeats. You can determine the last four nucleotides in
the shorter allele by subtracting ATGT from positions
19–22, revealing TAGG. The sequences of the two
alleles of this SSR locus (indicating only one strand
of DNA each) are thus:
Allele 1: 5′...GGCACACACACACAATGTTAGG...3′
Allele 2: 5′...GGCACACACACACACACAATGT...3′
c. The mechanism thought to be responsible for most
SSR polymorphisms is stuttering of DNA polymerase
during DNA replication
Solving Genetics Problems
The best way for students to assess and increase their understanding of genetics is to practice through problems.
Found at the end of each chapter, problem sets assist students in evaluating their grasp of key concepts and allow
them to apply what they have learned to real-life issues.
Review Problems
Problems are organized by chapter section and in order
of increasing difficulty to help students develop strong
problem-solving skills. The answers to select problems
can be found in the back of this text.
Solved Problems
Solved problems offer step-by-step guidance needed to
understand the problem-solving process.

Acknowledgements
The creation of a project of this scope is never solely the
work of the authors. We are grateful to our colleagues who
answered our numerous questions, or took the time to share
with us their suggestions for improvement of the previous
edition. Their willingness to share their expertise and expectations was a tremendous help to us.
∙ Charles Aquadro, Cornell University
∙ Daniel Barbash, Cornell University
∙ Johann Eberhart, University of Texas at Austin
∙ Tom Fox, Cornell University
∙ Kathy Gardner, University of Pittsburgh
∙ Larry Gilbert, University of Texas at Austin
∙ Nancy Hollingsworth, Stony Brook University
∙ Mark Kirkpatrick, University of Texas at Austin
∙ Alan Lloyd, University of Texas at Austin
∙ Paul Macdonald, University of Texas at Austin
∙ Kyle Miller, University of Texas at Austin
∙ Debra Nero, Cornell University
∙ Howard Ochman, University of Texas at Austin
∙ Kristin Patterson, University of Texas at Austin
∙ Inder Saxena, University of Texas at Austin
Janice Fischer and Michael Goldberg would also like to
thank their Genetics students at The University of Texas at
Austin and Cornell University for their amazing questions.
Many of their ideas have influenced the 6th edition.
A special thank-you to Kevin Campbell for his extensive
feedback on this sixth edition. We would also like to thank
the highly skilled publishing professionals at McGraw-Hill
who guided the development and production of the sixth
edition of Genetics: From Genes to Genomes: Justin Wyatt
and Michelle Vogler for their support; Mandy Clark for her
organizational skills and tireless work to tie up all loose
ends; and Vicki Krug and the entire production team for
their careful attention to detail and ability to move the
schedule along.
Genetics: The
Study of Biological
Information
Information can be stored in many ways, including the patterns
of letters and words in books and the sequence of nucleotides in
DNA molecules
GENETICS, THE SCIENCE of heredity, is at its core the
study of biological information. All living organisms—
from single-celled bacteria and protozoa to multicellular
plants and animals—must store and use vast quantities
of information to develop, survive, and reproduce in
their environments (Fig. 1.1). Geneticists examine how
organisms use biological information during their lifetimes and pass it on to
their progeny.
This book introduces you to the field of genetics as currently practiced in the
early twenty-first century. Several broad themes recur throughout this presentation.
First, we know that biological information is encoded in DNA, and that the proteins
responsible for an organism’s many functions are built from this code. Second, we
have found that all living forms are related at the molecular level. With the aid of
high-speed computers and other technologies, we can now study genomes at the
level of DNA sequence. These new methods have revealed that genomes have a
modular construction that has allowed rapid evolution of complexity. Finally, our
focus in this book is on human genetics and the application of genetic discoveries
to human problems.
Figure 1.1 The biological information in DNA generates an enormous diversity of living organisms
DNA: Life’s Fundamental
Information Molecule
learning objectives
1. Relate the structure of DNA to its function.
2. Differentiate between a chromosome, DNA, a gene,
a base pair, and a protein.
The process of evolution—the change in traits of groups
of organisms over time—has taken close to 4 billion
years to generate the amazing mechanisms for storing,
replicating, expressing, and diversifying biological information seen in organisms now inhabiting the earth. The
linear DNA molecule stores biological information in
units known as nucleotides. Within each DNA molecule,
the sequence of the four letters of the DNA alphabet—G,
C, A, and T—specify which proteins an organism will
make as well as when and where protein synthesis will
occur. The letters refer to the bases—guanine, cytosine,
adenine, and thymine—that are components of the nucleotide building blocks of DNA. The DNA molecule itself
is a double strand of nucleotides carrying complementary G–C or A–T base pairs (Fig. 1.2). These complementary base pairs bind together through hydrogen
bonds. The molecular complementarity of doublestranded DNA is its most important property and the key
to understanding how DNA functions.
Figure 1.1 The biological information in DNA generates an enormous diversity of living organisms.
(a): © Kwangshin Kim/Science Source; (b): © Frank & Joyce Burek/Getty Images RF; (c): © Carl D. Walsh/Getty Images RF; (d): © Brand X Pictures/PunchStock RF;
(e): © H. Wiesenhofer/PhotoLink/Getty Images RF; (f): © Ingram Publishing RF; (g): Source: Carey James Balboa. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Red_eyed_tree_frog_
edit2.jpg; (h): © Digital Vision RF
(a) Bacteria (b) Clown fish
(c) Lion
(d) Oak tree
(e) Poppies (f) Hummingbird
(g) Red-eyed tree frog
(h) Humans
Figure 1.2 Complementary base pairs are a key feature
of the DNA molecule. A single strand of DNA is composed of
nucleotide subunits each consisting of a deoxyribose sugar (white
pentagons), a phosphate (yellow circles), and one of four
nitrogenous bases—adenine, thymine, cytosine, or guanine
(designated as lavender or green As, Ts, Cs, or Gs). Hydrogen
bonds (dotted lines) enable A to associate tightly with T, and C to
associate tightly with G. Thus the two strands are complementary to
each other. The arrows labeled 5′ to 3′ show that the strands have
opposite orientations.
Although the DNA molecule is three-dimensional,
most of its information is one-dimensional and digital. The
information is one-dimensional because it is encoded as a
specific sequence of letters along the length of the molecule. It is digital because each unit of information—one of
the four letters of the DNA alphabet—is discrete. Because
genetic information is digital, it can be stored as readily in
a computer memory as in a DNA molecule. Indeed, the combined power of DNA sequencers, computers, and DNA
synthesizers makes it possible to store, interpret, replicate,
and transmit genetic information electronically from one
place to another anywhere on the planet.
The DNA regions that encode proteins are called
genes. Just as the limited number of letters in a written
alphabet places no restrictions on the stories one can
tell, so too the limited number of letters in the genetic
code alphabet places no restrictions on the kinds of proteins and thus the kinds of organisms genetic information
can define.
Within the cells of an organism, DNA molecules carrying the genes are assembled into chromosomes: organized structures containing DNA and proteins that package
and manage the storage, duplication, expression, and evolution of DNA (Fig. 1.3). The DNA within the entire collection of chromosomes in each cell of an organism is its
genome. Human cells, for example, contain 24 distinct
kinds of chromosomes carrying approximately 3 × 109
base pairs and roughly 27,000 genes. The amount of information that can be encoded in this size genome is equivalent to 6 million pages of text containing 250 words per
page, with each letter corresponding to one base pair.
To appreciate the long journey from a finite amount of
genetic information easily storable on a computer disk to
the production of a human being, we next must examine
proteins, the primary molecules that determine how complex systems of cells, tissues, and organisms function.
essential concepts
•	 DNA, a double-stranded macromolecule composed
of four nucleotides, is the repository of genetic
information.
 DNA is organized into chromosomes (of 24 different
types in humans) that collectively constitute an organism’s
genome.
•	 The human genome contains about 27,000 genes, most
of which encode proteins.
1.2 Proteins: The Functional
Molecules of Life Processes
learning objectives
1. Compare the chemical structures of DNA and proteins.
2. Differentiate between the functions of DNA and the
functions of proteins.
Although no single characteristic distinguishes living organisms from inanimate matter, you would have little trouble deciding which entities in a group of objects are alive.
Over time, these living organisms, governed by the laws of
physics and chemistry as well as a genetic program, would
be able to reproduce themselves. Most of the organisms
would also have an elaborate and complicated structure
that would change over time—sometimes drastically, as
when an insect larva metamorphoses into an adult. Yet another characteristic of life is the ability to move. Animals
swim, fly, walk, or run, while plants grow toward or away
from light. Still another characteristic is the capacity to
adapt selectively to the environment. Finally, a key characteristic of living organisms is the ability to use sources of
energy and matter to grow—that is, the ability to convert
foreign material into their own body parts. The chemical
and physical reactions that carry out these conversions are
known as metabolism.
Most properties of living organisms arise ultimately
from the class of molecules known as proteins—large
polymers composed of hundreds to thousands of amino
acid subunits strung together in long chains. Each chain
folds into a specific three-dimensional conformation dictated by the sequence of its amino acids (Fig. 1.4). Most
proteins are composed of 20 different amino acids. The
information in the DNA of genes dictates, via a genetic
code, the order of amino acids in a protein molecule.
You can think of proteins as constructed from a set of
20 different kinds of snap beads distinguished by color and
shape. If you were to arrange the beads in any order, make
strings of a thousand beads each, and then fold or twist
the chains into shapes dictated by the order of their beads,
you would be able to make a nearly infinite number of
different three-dimensional shapes. The astonishing diversity of three-dimensional protein structures generates the
extraordinary diversity of protein functions that is the basis of each organism’s complex and adaptive behavior (Fig. 1.4b
and c). The structure and shape of the hemoglobin protein,
for example, allow it to transport oxygen in the bloodstream
and release it to the tissues. In contrast, lactate dehydrogenase is an enzyme that converts lactate to pyruvate, an
important step in producing cellular energy. Most of the
properties associated with life emerge from the constellation of protein molecules that an organism synthesizes according to instructions contained in its DNA.
essential concepts
•	 Proteins are responsible for most biological functions of
cells and organisms.
•	 A protein is a macromolecule consisting of amino acids
linked in a linear sequence.
•	 The sequences of amino acids in proteins are encoded
by genes within the DNA.
Figure 1.4 Proteins are polymers of amino acids that
fold in three dimensions. (a) Structural formulas for two amino
acids: alanine and tyrosine. All amino acids have a basic amino
group (NH2; green) at one end and an acidic carboxyl group
(COOH; blue) at the other. The specific side chain (red) determines
the amino acid’s chemical properties. (b) The amino acid sequences
of two different human proteins: the ß chain of hemoglobin (green),
and the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (purple). (c) The different
amino acid sequences of these proteins dictate different threedimensional shapes. The specific sequence of amino acids in a chain
determines the precise three-dimensional shape of the protein
Molecular Similarities
of All Life-Forms
learning objective
1. Summarize the molecular evidence for the common
origin of living organisms
The evolution of biological information is a fascinating
story spanning the 4 billion years of earth’s history. Many
biologists think that RNA was the first informationprocessing molecule to appear. Very similar to DNA, RNA
molecules are also composed of four subunits: the bases G,
C, A, and U (for uracil, which replaces the T of DNA). Like
DNA, RNA has the capacity to store, replicate, and express
information; like proteins, RNA can fold in three dimensions to produce molecules capable of catalyzing the chemistry of life. In fact, you will learn that the ultimate function
of some genes is to encode RNA molecules instead of proteins. RNA molecules, however, are intrinsically unstable.
Thus, it is probable that the more stable DNA took over the
linear information storage and replication functions of
RNA, while proteins, with their far greater capacity for diversity, preempted in large part the functions derived from
RNA’s three-dimensional folding. With this division of labor, RNA became primarily an intermediary in converting
the information in DNA into the sequence of amino acids
in protein (Fig. 1.5a). The separation that placed information storage in DNA and biological function mainly in proteins was so successful that all known organisms alive
today descend from the first organisms that happened upon
this molecular specialization.
The evidence for the common origin of all living forms
is present in their DNA sequences. All living organisms use
essentially the same genetic code in which various triplet
groupings of the four letters of the DNA and RNA alphabets
encode the 20 letters of the amino acid alphabet (Fig. 1.5b)

Figure 1.5 RNA is an intermediary in the conversion of
DNA information into protein via the genetic code. (a) The
linear bases of DNA are copied through molecular complementarity
into the linear bases of RNA. The bases of RNA are read three at a
time (that is, as triplets) to encode the amino acid subunits of
proteins. (b) The genetic code dictionary specifies the relationship
between RNA triplets and the amino acid subunits of proteins.
Figure 1.6 Comparisons of gene products in different
species provide evidence for the relatedness of living
organisms. This chart shows the amino acid sequence for
equivalent portions of the cytochrome c protein in six species:
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast), Arabidopsis thaliana (a weedlike
flowering plant), Caenorhabditis elegans (a nematode), Drosophila
melanogaster (the fruit fly), Mus musculus (the house mouse),
and Homo sapiens (humans). Consult Fig. 1.4b for the key to
amino acid names.
The relatedness of all living organisms is also evident
from comparisons of genes with similar functions in very
different organisms. A striking similarity exists between
the genes for many corresponding proteins in bacteria,
yeast, plants, worms, flies, mice, and humans. For example, most of the amino acids in the cytochrome c proteins
of diverse species are identical to each other (Fig. 1.6),
indicating that these proteins all derived from a common
ancestral protein. It is also important to note that some
amino acids in these various cytochrome c proteins are
different. The reason is that different mutations, that is, changes in nucleotide pairs, can occur when genes are
passed from one generation of an organism to the next.
The accumulation of these mutations in genomes is the
main driving force of evolution.
Despite the occurrence of mutations that alter DNA
and thus protein sequences, it is often possible to place a
gene from one organism into the genome of a very different
organism and see it function normally in the new environment. Human genes that help regulate cell division, for example, can replace related genes in yeast and enable the
yeast cells to function normally.
One of the most striking examples of relatedness at
this level of biological information was uncovered in studies of eye development. Both insects and vertebrates (including humans) have eyes, but they are of very different
types (Fig. 1.7). Biologists had long assumed that the evolution of eyes occurred independently, and in many evolution textbooks, eyes were used as an example of convergent
evolution, in which structurally unrelated but functionally
analogous organs emerge in different species as a result of
natural selection. Studies of a gene called Pax6 have turned
this view upside down.
Mutations in the Pax6 gene lead to a failure of eye development in both people and mice, and molecular studies have
suggested that Pax6 might play a central role in the initiation
of eye development in all vertebrates. Remarkably, when the
human Pax6 gene is expressed in cells along the surface of
the fruit fly body, it induces numerous little eyes to develop
there. It turns out that fruit flies also have a gene specifying a protein whose amino acid sequence is distantly but clearly
related to that of the protein specified by human Pax6; and
furthermore, certain mutations in the fly gene result in animals lacking eyes. Taken together, these results demonstrate
that during 600 million years of divergent evolution, an ancestral gene that served as the main control switch for initiating eye development accumulated different mutations in the
lineages leading to people and fruit flies, but the gene still
serves the same function in both species.
The usefulness of the relatedness and unity at all levels
of biological information cannot be overstated. It means
that in many cases, the experimental manipulation of organisms known as model organisms can shed light on gene
functions in humans. If genes similar to human genes function in simple model organisms such as fruit flies or bacteria, scientists can determine gene function and regulation
in these experimentally manipulable organisms and bring
these insights to an understanding of the human organism.
essential concepts
•	 Living organisms exhibit marked similarities at the
molecular level in the ways they use DNA and RNA to
make proteins.
•	 Certain genes have persisted throughout the evolution of
widely divergent species.
Figure 1.7 The eyes of insects and humans have a
common ancestor. (a) A fly eye and (b) a human eye.
Figure 1.8 How genes arise by duplication and
divergence. Ancestral gene A contains exons (green, red, and
purple) separated by introns in blue. Gene A is duplicated to create
two copies that are originally identical, but mutations in either or
both (other colors) cause the copies to diverge. Additional rounds of
duplication and divergence create a family of related genes.
The Modular Construction
of Genomes
learning objectives
1. Describe mechanisms by which new genes could arise.
2. Explain how regulation of gene expression can alter
gene function.
We have seen that roughly 27,000 genes direct human
growth and development. How did such complexity arise?
Recent technical advances have enabled researchers to
complete structural analyses of the entire genome of many
organisms. The information obtained reveals that gene
families have arisen by duplication of a primordial gene;
after duplication, mutations may cause the two copies to
diverge from each other (Fig. 1.8). In both humans and
chimpanzees, for example, four different genes produce
different rhodopsin proteins that are expressed in photoreceptors of distinct retinal cells. Each of these proteins
functions in a slightly different way so that four kinds of
retinal cells respond to light of different wavelengths and
intensities, resulting in color vision. The four rhodopsin
genes arose from a single primordial gene by several duplications followed by slight divergences in structure.
Duplication followed by divergence underlies the evolution of new genes with new functions. This principle appears to have been built into the genome structure of all
multicellular organisms. The protein-coding region of most
genes is subdivided into as many as 10 or more small pieces
(called exons), separated by DNA that does not code for
protein (called introns) as shown in Fig. 1.8. This modular
construction facilitates the rearrangement of different modules from different genes to create new combinations during evolution. It is likely that this process of modular
reassortment facilitated the rapid diversification of living
forms about 570 million years ago (see Fig. 1.8).
The tremendous advantage of the duplication and
divergence of existing pieces of genetic information is
evident in the history of life’s evolution (Table 1.1).
Prokaryotic cells such as bacteria, which do not have a
membrane-bounded nucleus, evolved about 3.7 billion
years ago; eukaryotic cells such as algae, which have a
membrane-bounded nucleus, emerged around 2 billion
years ago; and multicellular eukaryotic organisms appeared
700–600 million years ago. Then, about 570 million years
ago, within the relatively short evolutionary time of roughly
20–50 million years known as the Cambrian explosion, the
multicellular life-forms diverged into a bewildering array
of organisms, including primitive vertebrates.
Figure 1.9 Two-winged and four-winged flies. Geneticists
converted a contemporary normal two-winged fly to a four-winged
insect resembling the fly’s evolutionary antecedent. They accomplished this by mutating a key element in the fly’s regulatory
network. Note the club-shaped halteres (arrows) behind the wings
of the fly at the top.
(both): © Edward Lewis, California Institute of Technology
A fascinating question is: How could the multicellular
forms achieve such enormous diversity in only 20–50 million
years? The answer lies, in part, in the hierarchic organization
of the information encoded in chromosomes. Exons are arranged into genes; genes duplicate and diverge to generate
gene families; and gene families sometimes rapidly expand
to gene superfamilies containing hundreds of related genes.
In both mouse and human adults, for example, the immune
system is encoded by a gene superfamily composed of hundreds of closely related but slightly divergent genes. With the
emergence of each successively larger informational unit,
evolution gains the ability to duplicate increasingly complex
informational modules through single genetic events.
Probably even more important for the evolution of
complexity is the rapid change of regulatory networks that
specify how genes behave (that is, when, where, and to
what degree they are expressed) during development. For
example, the two-winged fly evolved from a four-winged
ancestor not because of changes in gene-encoded structural
proteins, but rather because of a rewiring of the regulatory
network, which converted one pair of wings into two small
balancing organs known as halteres (Fig. 1.9).
essential concepts
•	 Gene duplication followed by the divergence of copies is
one explanation for how new functions evolve.
•	 The reshuffling of exons in eukaryotes provides another
mechanism for the rapid diversification of genomes.
•	 Changes in DNA that affect gene regulation—where,
when, and to what degree genes are expressed—also
generate evolutionary change.
Modern Genetic Techniques
learning objectives
1. Explain how advances in technology have accelerated
the analysis of genomes.
2. Compare the knowledge obtained from genetic
dissection and from genome sequencing.
3. Discuss how genome sequence information can be
used to treat or cure diseases.
The complexity of living systems has developed over 4 billion years from the continuous amplification and refinement of genetic information. The simplest bacterial cells
contain about 1000 genes that interact in complex networks. Yeast cells, the simplest eukaryotic cells, contain
about 5800 genes. Nematodes (roundworms) contain about
20,000 genes, and fruit flies contain roughly 13,000 genes.
Humans have approximately 27,000 genes; surprisingly,
the flowering plant Arabidopsis has as many and the
zebrafish D. rerio has even more (Fig. 1.10). Each of these
organisms has provided valuable insights into aspects of
biology that are conserved among all organisms as well as
other phenomena that are species-specific.
Genetic Dissection of Model
Organisms Reveals the Working
of Biological Processes
Model organisms including bacteria, yeast, nematodes,
fruit flies, Arabidopsis, zebrafish, and mice are extremely
valuable to researchers, who can use these organisms to
analyze the complexity of a genome piece by piece. The
logic used in genetic dissection is quite simple: inactivate a
gene in a model organism and observe the consequences.
For example, the loss of a gene for visual pigment produces
fruit flies with white eyes instead of eyes of the normal red
color. One can thus conclude that the protein product of
this gene plays a key role in eye pigmentation. From their
study of model organisms, geneticists are amassing a detailed picture of the complexity of living systems.
Whole-Genome Sequencing Can Identify
Mutant Genes that Cause Disease
A complementary way to study an organism’s genetic complexity is to look not just at one gene at a time, but rather at
the genome as a whole. The new tools of genomics, particularly high-throughput DNA sequencers, have the
capacity to analyze all the genes of any living thing. In fact,
the complete nucleotide sequences of representative
genomes of the model species listed above, as well as of
humans, have all been determined.
The first draft of the human genome sequence announced by the Human Genome Project in 2001 cost
$3 billion and took over 10 years to produce. Since then,
rapid advances in genome sequencing technology have
made it possible in 2016 to determine the genome sequence
of an individual in just a few days for about $1000. Alongside the advances in DNA sequencing technology have
been the development of computer algorithms to analyze
the sequence data and the establishment of online databases
that catalog the differences in individual genome sequences.
No example better illustrates the power of genome sequencing technology than its use in the identification of
gene mutations that cause human genetic diseases. For diseases that result from mutation of a single gene, the gene
responsible often may be identified by determining the genome sequence of just a few people or sometimes even that
of a single individual.
In the case shown in Fig. 1.11a, geneticists analyzed
whole genome sequences to find a gene mutation underlying
a rare brain malformation disease called microcephaly. The inheritance pattern observed for microcephaly indicated that
it is a so-called recessive disease, meaning that diseased people inherit two mutant gene copies, one from each normal
parent. The parents have one normal gene copy and one mutant copy, explaining why the parents’ brains do not have this
malformation. Sequencing and analysis of the genomes of
two children with microcephaly from the same family identified a single rare gene mutation present in both siblings—a
deletion of four base pairs within a gene called WDR62
(Fig. 1.11b). Each parent was found to have one normal copy
of WDR62 and one copy with the four base pair deletion
(Fig. 1.11b). Subsequently, the researchers found that different families with microcephalic children harbored different
mutations in the same gene (Fig. 1.11c), thus confirming
WDR62 as a causative gene for microcephaly.
Gene Therapy May Help Cure
Genetic Diseases
By enabling rapid disease gene discovery, the sequencing of
whole genomes is revolutionizing medicine. Knowledge of
disease genes can inform parents whether their children might
suffer from a severely debilitating disease like microcephaly, allowing the parents to consider ways in which to avoid or to
prepare for such an outcome. Moreover, identification of a
disease gene provides information about the protein encoded
by that gene that can sometimes guide the design of effective
therapeutics to treat the disease. This strategy has not yet been
useful in the case of microcephaly, but it has already been
of tremendous value in developing drugs to combat other
genetic diseases, including certain kinds of cancer.
Dramatic progress within the last few years offers hope
that medical scientists may eventually be able to treat genetic diseases by modifying the genomes of the somatic
(body) cells affected by the disease syndrome. One method
under development is called gene therapy; here, scientists
introduce normal copies of genes into human cells, where
they can be expressed and compensate for their mutant,
nonfunctional counterparts in the genome. An alternative,
very recent gene therapy approach is genome editing, in
which researchers change the base-pair sequence of a mutant gene to that of its normal counterpart. Gene therapy and
genome editing have been used in model organisms such as
mice to restore proper gene function and sometimes reverse
the disease process, but the application of these techniques
to human conditions is still only in very early stages.
Figure 1.10 Seven model organisms whose genomes were sequenced as part of the Human Genome Project. The chart
indicates genome size in millions of base pairs, or megabases (Mb). The bottom row shows the approximate number of genes for each organism.
Figure 1.11 A causal gene for microcephaly identified by genome sequencing. (a) Magnetic resonance images of normal and
microcephalic brains. (b) Sequence analysis of normal and mutant copies of the WDR62 gene. The mutation is a deletion of the four nucleotides
TGCC (green) that causes a major change in the amino acid sequence of the protein product of the gene. The letters above each triplet sequence
identify the encoded amino acid. (c) Five different mutations in the WDR62 gene in five different families are shown. Four of the mutations affect
the identity of a single amino acid in the protein encoded by the gene. For example, W224S means that the 224th amino acid is normally W
(tryptophan) but is changed to S (serine) by the mutation. The arrow indicates the position of the TGCC deletion mutation shown in (b).
Scientists analyze mutations in model organisms to
understand the molecular basis of many biological
processes.
•	 Automated sequencing and computer analysis have
made possible the rapid determination of DNA sequences
in genomes, allowing researchers to pinpoint genes
responsible for genetic diseases.
•	 Knowledge of disease genes helps parents make
informed reproductive decisions, allows pharmaceutical
companies to design effective drugs, and in the future will
enable medical researchers to manipulate somatic cell
genomes to reverse disease effects.
Human Genetics and Society
learning objectives
1. Describe the types of information that can be obtained
from an individual’s genome sequence.
2. Discuss the social issues that arise from the availability
of personal genome sequences.
Over the next 25 years, geneticists will identify hundreds of
genes with variations that predispose people to many types
of disease: cardiovascular, cancerous, immunological, mental, metabolic. Some mutations will always cause disease,
as in the microcephaly example just discussed; others will
only predispose to disease. For example, a change in a specific single DNA base pair in the β-globin gene will nearly
always cause sickle-cell anemia, a painful, life-threatening
condition that leads to severe anemia. By contrast, a mutation in the breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) gene increases the risk
of breast cancer to between 40% and 80% in a woman carrying one copy of the mutation. This conditional state arises
because the BRCA1 gene interacts with environmental factors that affect the probability of activating the cancerous
condition, and because various forms of other genes can
modify the effect of the BRCA1 gene mutation.
Physicians may be able to use DNA diagnostics—a
collection of techniques for characterizing genes—to analyze an individual’s DNA for genes that predispose to some
diseases. With this genetic profile, doctors may be able to
write out a predictive health history based on probabilities
for some medical conditions.
Many Social Issues Need to Be Addressed
Although biological information is similar to other types of
information from a strictly technical point of view, it is as
different as can be in its meaning and impact on individual human beings and on human society as a whole. The difference lies in the personal nature of the unique genetic profile
carried by each person from birth. Within the genome of
each individual is complex information that provides
greater or lower susceptibility or resistance to many diseases, as well as greater or lesser potential for the expression of many physiological and neurological attributes that
distinguish people from each other. Until now, almost all of
this information has remained hidden away. But if research
continues at its present pace, in less than a decade it will
become possible to understand many aspects of a person’s
genetic make-up, and with this information will come the
power to make some limited predictions about future possibilities and risks.
As you will see in many of the Genetics and Society
boxes throughout this book, society can use genetic information not only to help people but also to restrict their lives
(for example, by denying insurance or employment). We
believe that just as our society respects an individual’s right
to privacy in other realms, it should also respect the privacy
of an individual’s genetic profile and work against all types
of discrimination. Indeed, in 2008 the United States federal
government passed the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act prohibiting insurance companies and employers
from discrimination on the basis of genetic tests.
Another issue raised by the potential for detailed genetic profiles is the interpretation or misinterpretation of
that information. Without accurate interpretation, the information becomes useless at best and harmful at worst. Proper
interpretation of genetic information requires some understanding of statistical concepts such as risk and probability.
As an example, women found to have the BRCA1 mutation
described above need to weigh the possible risks and benefits of preventive treatments such as mastectomy against the
statistical probability that they would suffer otherwise from
breast cancer. To help people understand these concepts,
widespread education in this area will be essential.
To many people, the most frightening potential of the
new genetics is the development of gene therapy technologies that can alter or add to the genes present within the
germ line (reproductive cell precursors) of human embryos. In contrast with the previously described use of
such genetic engineering to treat diseases in non-inheritable
somatic cells, germ-line cells that have been manipulated
in these ways can be transmitted between generations
and thus have the potential to influence the evolution of
our species.
Some people caution that developing the power to alter
our own genomes is a step we should not take, arguing that
if genetic information and technology are misused, as they
certainly have been in the past, the consequences could be
horrific. Attempts to use genetic information for social purposes were prevalent in the early twentieth century, leading
to enforced sterilization of individuals thought to be inferior, to laws that prohibited interracial marriage, and to laws prohibiting immigration of certain ethnic groups. The
basis of these actions was not scientific and has been thoroughly discredited.
Others agree that we must not repeat the mistakes of
the past, but they warn that if the new technologies could
help children and adults lead healthier, happier lives, we
cannot outlaw their application. Most agree that the biological revolution we are living through will have a greater
impact on human society than any technological revolution
of the past and that education and public debate are the key
to preparing for the consequences of this revolution.
The focus on human genetics in this book looks forward into the new era of biology and genetic analysis. These
new possibilities raise serious moral and ethical issues that will demand wisdom and humility. It is in the hope of educating young people for the moral and ethical challenges
awaiting the next generation that we write this book.
essential concepts
•	 Genome sequences may identify not only genes that
always cause disease but also genes that predispose
an individual to a disease.
•	 As a society, we must ensure that genetic knowledge
is properly interpreted and that individuals’ privacy is
protected.
Genetics, the study of biological information, is also the
study of the DNA and RNA molecules that store, replicate,
transmit, express, and evolve information for the construction of proteins. At the molecular level, all living things are
closely related, and as a result, observations of model organisms as different as yeast and mice can provide insights
into general biological principles as well as human biology.
Remarkably, more than 75 years before the discovery
of DNA, Gregor Mendel, an Augustinian monk, delineated the basic laws of gene transmission with no knowledge of
the molecular basis of heredity. He accomplished this by
following simple traits, such as flower or seed color,
through several generations of the pea plant (Pisum sativum).
We now know that his findings apply to all sexually reproducing organisms. Chapter 2 describes Mendel’s studies
and insights, which became the foundation of the field
of genetics.
Vocabulary
1. Choose the phrase from the right column that best fits
the term in the left column.
a. complementarity 1. a linear polymer of amino
acids that folds into a
particular shape
b. nucleotide 2. part of a gene that does not
contain protein coding
information
c. chromosomes 3. a polymer of nucleotides that is
an intermediary in the synthesis
of proteins from instructions in
DNA
d. protein 4. G–C and A–T base pairing in
DNA through hydrogen bonds
e. genome 5. alteration of DNA sequence . gene 6. part of a gene that can contain
protein coding information
g. uracil 7. DNA/protein structures that
contain genes
h. exon 8. DNA information for a single
function, such as production of a
protein
i. intron 9. the entirety of an organism’s
hereditary information
j. DNA 10. a double-stranded polymer of
nucleotides that stores the
inherited blueprint of an organism
k. RNA 11. subunit of the DNA
macromolecule
l. mutation 12. the only one of the four bases in
RNA that is not in DNA
Section 1.1
2. If one strand of a DNA molecule has the base sequence
5′-AGCATTAAGCT-3′, what is the base sequence of
the other, complementary strand?
3. The size of one copy of the human genome is approximately 3 billion base pairs, and it contains about
27,000 genes organized into 23 chromosomes.
a. Human chromosomes vary in size. What would
you predict is the size of the average chromosome?
b. Assuming that genes are spread evenly among
chromosomes, how many genes does an average
human chromosome contain?
c. About half of the DNA in chromosomes contains
genes. How large (in base pairs) is an average
human gene?
Section 1.2
4. Indicate whether each of the following words or
phrases applies to proteins, DNA, or both.
a. a macromolecule composed of a string of subunits
b. double-stranded
c. four different subunits
d. 20 different subunits
e. composed of amino acids
f. composed of nucleotides
g. contains a code used to generate other
macromolecules
h. performs chemical reactions
5. a. How many different DNA strands composed of
100 nucleotides could possibly exist?
b. How many different proteins composed of
100 amino acids could possibly exist?
Section 1.3
6. RNA shares with proteins the ability to fold into
complex three-dimensional shapes. As a result, RNA
molecules can, like protein molecules, catalyze biochemical reactions (that is, both kinds of molecules
can act as enzymes, or biological catalysts). These
statements are not true of DNA. Why can some
RNA molecules act as enzymes whereas DNA
molecules cannot? (Hint: Most RNA molecules
consist of a single strand of nucleotides while most
DNA molecules are double helixes made of two
strands of nucleotides.)
7. The human protein lactate dehydrogenase shown in
Fig. 1.4 has 332 amino acids. What is the smallest
possible combined size of the parts of the gene that
specify this protein using the genetic code 8. a. Are the triplets in the genetic code table shown in
Fig. 1.5b written as DNA or RNA?
b. Two amino acids are each specified only by a single triplet. Identify these two amino acids and the
corresponding triplets.
c. If you know the sequence of amino acids in a protein, what does the genetic code table allow you to
infer about the sequence of base pairs in the gene
that specifies that protein?
9. Why do scientists think that all forms of life on earth
have a common origin?
10. Why would a geneticist study a yeast cell or a fruit fly
or a mouse in order to understand human genes and
human biology?
11. How can a scientist tell if a protein present in bacteria
and a fruit fly protein have a common origin? How
can a scientist determine whether a protein with a
common origin in bacteria and a fruit fly function
in a common pathway?
12. Figure 1.6 shows the amino acid sequences of parts of
the cytochrome c proteins from several different organisms. Some of these amino acids are highlighted
in dark orange, some in light orange, and some are
not highlighted at all. Which of these three classes
of amino acids is likely to be most important for the
biochemical function of cytochrome c proteins?
Section 1.4
13. Why do scientists think that new genes arise by
duplication of an original gene and divergence by
mutation?
14. Explain how the exon/intron structure of genes
contributes to the generation of new gene functions
during evolution.
15. Mutations in genes that change their pattern of expression (the time and cell type in which the gene product
is produced) are thought to be a major factor in the evolution of different organisms. Would you expect the
same protein to work in the same way (for example, to
perform the same kind of enzymatic reaction) in two
different types of cells (for example, cells in the retina
of the eye and muscle cells)? Is it possible that the same
protein might function in different biochemical pathways in eye cells and muscle cells even if the protein’s
basic mechanism always remains the same?
Section 1.5
16. A single zebrafish gene function was inactivated completely by mutation, and a zebrafish with this mutation had none of its normal horizontal stripes. For
each of the following statements, indicate whether the statement is certainly true, certainly untrue, or if there
is insufficient information to decide.
a. The normal gene function is required for the viability of the zebrafish.
b. The normal gene function is required for the formation of stripes.
c. The normal gene function is required to make the
pigment deposited in the stripes.
d. The gene is required in zebrafish only for stripe
formation.
17. Different mutations in the WDR62 gene that inactivate gene function were found in the genomes of
many different people with microcephaly. This information provided strong support for the idea that the
WDR62 gene mutation causes microcephaly.
a. The human genome sequence identified WDR62
as one of the approximately 27,000 genes in the
human genome. What information about the function
of WDR62 do you think was learned originally
from the DNA sequence of the normal human
genome?
b. What additional information was provided by
identification of WDR62 as the microcephaly
disease gene?
c. The mouse genome contains a gene similar to human WDR62. Experiments in mice have shown
that the mouse WDR62 gene is expressed in the brain. Technology is now available that allows scientists to generate mice in which the two normal
copies of the WDR62 gene are replaced with mutant copies of the gene that are nonfunctional. Why
would a scientist want to generate such WDR62
mutant mice?
18. Researchers have successfully used gene therapy to
ameliorate some human genetic diseases by adding a
normal gene copy to cells whose genomes originally
had only nonfunctional mutant copies of that gene.
For example, a form of blindness due to the lack of a
single protein called RPE65 has been reversed by
introduction of a normal RPE65 gene to cells of the
retina of adults.
a. The success of this gene therapy approach provides
us with clues about the role of the RPE65 protein
in the retina. Do you think that RPE65 is needed
for the proper development of the human eye?
b. Can you see a potential difficulty in applying this gene
therapy approach for diseases like microcephaly?
Section 1.6
19. By the time this book is published, it will likely be
possible for you to obtain the sequence of your genome at nominal cost. Do you want this information?
Explain the factors that affected your decision. (You
may not be able to answer this question until you are
finished reading this book.)

Mendel’s Principles
of Heredity
Although Mendel’s laws can predict the probability that an individual will have a certain genetic makeup, the chance meeting of
particular male and female gametes determines an individual’s
actual genetic fate.
© Lawrence Manning/Corbis
A QUICK GLANCE at an extended family portrait is
likely to reveal children who resemble one parent or the
other, or who look like a combination of the two (Fig. 2.1). Some children, however,
look unlike any of the assembled relatives and more like a great, great grandparent.
What causes the similarities and differences of appearance and the skipping of
generations?
The answers lie in our genes, the basic units of biological information, and in
heredity, the way genes transmit physiological, anatomical, and behavioral traits
from parents to offspring. Each of us starts out as a single fertilized egg cell that
develops, by division and differentiation, into a mature adult made up of 1014 (a hundred trillion) specialized cells capable of carrying out all the body’s functions and
controlling our outward appearance. Genes, passed from one generation to the next,
underlie the formation of every heritable trait. Such traits are as diverse as the presence of a cleft in your chin, the tendency to lose hair as you age, your hair, eye, and
skin color, and even your susceptibility to certain cancers. All such traits run in families in predictable patterns that impose some possibilities and exclude others.
Genetics, the science of heredity, pursues a precise explanation of the biological structures and mechanisms that determine inheritance. In some instances, the
relationship between gene and trait is remarkably simple. A single change in a single gene, for example, results in sickle-cell anemia, a disease in which the hemoglobin molecule found in red blood cells is defective. In other instances, the correlations
between genes and traits are bewilderingly complex. An example is the genetic basis
of facial features, in which many genes determine a large number of molecules that
interact to generate the combination we recognize as a friend’s face.
Gregor Mendel (1822–1884; Fig. 2.2), a stocky, bespectacled Augustinian monk
and expert plant breeder, discovered the basic principles of genetics in the mid-nineteenth
century. He published his findings in 1866, just seven years after Darwin’s On the Origin of Species appeared in print. Mendel lived and worked in Brünn, Austria (now Brno
in the Czech Republic), where he examined the inheritance of clear-cut alternative traits
in pea plants, such as purple versus white flowers or yellow versus green seeds. In so doing, he inferred genetic laws that allowed him to make verifiable predictions about
which traits would appear, disappear, and then reappear, and in which generations.
Mendel’s laws are based on the hypothesis that observable traits are determined
by independent units of inheritance not visible to the naked eye. We now call these
units genes. The concept of the gene continues to change as research deepens and
refines our understanding. Today, a gene is recognized as a region of DNA that
encodes a specific protein or a particular type of RNA. In the beginning, however,
it was an abstraction—an imagined particle with no physical features, the function
of which was to control a visible trait by an unknown mechanism.
We begin our study of genetics with a detailed look at what Mendel’s laws are
and how they were discovered. In subsequent chapters, we discuss logical extensions
to these laws and describe how Mendel’s successors grounded the abstract concept
of hereditary units (genes) in an actual biological molecule (DNA).
Four general themes emerge from our detailed discussion of Mendel’s work. The
first is that variation, as expressed in alternative forms of a trait, is widespread in nature.
This genetic diversity provides the raw material for the continuously evolving variety of
life we see around us. Second, observable variation is essential for following genes from
one generation to the next. Third, variation is not distributed solely by chance; rather, it
is inherited according to genetic laws that explain why like begets both like and unlike.
Dogs beget other dogs—but hundreds of breeds of dogs are known. Even within a breed,
such as Labrador retrievers, genetic variation exists: Two black dogs could have a litter
of black, chocolate (brown), and yellow puppies (Fig. 2.3). Mendel’s insights help explain
why this is so. Fourth, the laws Mendel discovered about heredity apply equally well to
all sexually reproducing organisms, from protozoans to peas to dogs to people.
Figure 2.1 A family portrait. The extended
family shown here includes members of four
generations.
© Bruce Ayres/Getty Images
Figure 2.2 Gregor
Mendel. Photographed
around 1862 holding one of
his experimental plants.
© Science Source
Figure 2.3 Like begets like and unlike.
A Labrador retriever with her litter of pups.
© Saudjie Cross Siino/Weathertop Labradors
The Puzzle of Inheritance
learning objectives
1. Relate how Mendel’s experimental approach
is similar to the process of modern scientific
inquiry.
2. Describe how Mendel cross-fertilized and self-fertilized
pea plants.
3. Explain the importance of Mendel’s inclusion of
reciprocal crosses within his controlled breeding
program of pea plants.
4. Predict the type of progeny produced by Mendel’s
crosses between pure-breeding plants with discrete,
antagonistic traits, such as purple versus white flowers.
Several steps lead to an understanding of genetic phenomena: the careful observation over time of groups of organisms, such as human families, herds of cattle, or fields of corn or tomatoes; the rigorous analysis of systematically
recorded information gleaned from these observations; and
the development of a theoretical framework that can explain the origins and relationships of these phenomena. In
the mid-nineteenth century, Gregor Mendel became the
first person to combine data collection, analysis, and theory in a successful pursuit of the true basis of heredity. For
many thousands of years before that, the only genetic practice was the selective breeding of domesticated plants and
animals, with no guarantee of what a particular mating
would produce.
Artificial Selection Was the First
Applied Genetic Technique
A rudimentary use of genetics was the driving force behind
a key transition in human civilization, allowing hunters and
gatherers to settle in villages and survive as shepherds and
farmers. Even before recorded history, people practiced applied genetics as they domesticated plants and animals for
their own uses. From a large litter of semitamed wolves, for
example, they sent the savage and the misbehaving to the
stew pot while sparing the alert sentries and friendly companions for longer life and eventual mating. As a result of
this artificial selection—purposeful control over mating
by choice of parents for the next generation—the domestic
dog (Canis lupus familiaris) slowly arose from ancestral
wolves (Canis lupus). The oldest bones identified indisputably as dog (and not wolf) are a skull excavated from a
20,000-year-old Alaskan settlement. Many millennia of
evolution guided by artificial selection have produced massive Great Danes and minuscule Chihuahuas as well as
hundreds of other modern breeds of dog. By 10,000 years
ago, people had begun to use this same kind of genetic
manipulation to develop economically valuable herds of
reindeer, sheep, goats, pigs, and cattle that produced lifesustaining meat, milk, hides, and wools.
Farmers also carried out artificial selection of plants,
storing seed from the hardiest and tastiest individuals for
the next planting, eventually obtaining strains that grew
better, produced more, and were easier to cultivate and harvest. In this way, scrawny, weed-like plants gradually, with
human guidance, turned into rice, wheat, barley, lentils,
and dates in Asia; corn, squash, tomatoes, potatoes, and
peppers in the Americas; yams, peanuts, and gourds in Africa. Later, plant breeders recognized male and female organs in plants and carried out artificial pollination. An
Assyrian frieze carved in the ninth century b.c., pictured in
Fig. 2.4, is the oldest known visual record of this kind of
genetic experiment. It depicts priests brushing the flowers
of female date palms with selected male pollen. By this
method of artificial selection, early practical geneticists
produced several hundred varieties of dates, each differing
in specific observable qualities, such as the fruit’s size, color, or taste. A 1929 botanical survey of three oases in
Egypt turned up 400 varieties of date-bearing palms,
twentieth-century evidence of the natural and artificially
generated variation among these trees.
Figure 2.4 The earliest known record of applied
genetics. In this 2800-year-old Assyrian relief from the Northwest
Palace of Assurnasirpal II (883–859 b.c.), priests wearing bird masks
artificially pollinate flowers of female date palms.
Image copyright © The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source: Art
Resource, NY
Desirable Traits Sometimes Disappear
and Reappear
In 1822, the year of Mendel’s birth, what people in Austria
understood about the basic principles of heredity was not
much different from what the people of ancient Assyria
had known. By the nineteenth century, plant and animal
breeders had created many strains in which offspring often
carried a prized parental trait. Using such strains, breeders
could produce plants or animals with desired characteristics for food and fiber, but they could not always predict
why a valued trait would sometimes disappear and then
reappear in only some offspring.
For example, selective breeding practices had resulted
in valuable flocks of merino sheep producing large quantities of soft, fine wool, but at the 1837 annual meeting of the
Moravian Sheep Breeders Society, one breeder’s dilemma
epitomized the state of the art. He possessed an outstanding
ram that would be priceless “if its advantages are inherited
by its offspring,” but “if they are not inherited, then it is worth no more than the cost of wool, meat, and skin.”
Which would it be? According to the meeting’s recorded
minutes, current breeding practices offered no definite answers. In his concluding remarks at this sheep-breeders
meeting, the Abbot Cyril Napp pointed to a possible way
out. He proposed that breeders could improve their ability
to predict what traits would appear in the offspring by finding the answers to three basic questions: What is inherited?
How is it inherited? What is the role of chance in heredity?
This quandary is where matters stood in 1843 when
21-year-old Gregor Mendel entered the monastery in
Brünn, presided over by the same Abbot Napp. Although
Mendel was a monk trained in theology, he was not a rank
amateur in science. The province of Moravia, in which
Brünn was located, was a center of learning and scientific
activity. Mendel was able to acquire a copy of Darwin’s On
the Origin of Species shortly after it was translated into
German in 1863. Abbot Napp, recognizing Mendel’s intellectual abilities, sent him to the University of Vienna—all
expenses paid—where he prescribed his own course of
study. Mendel’s choices were an unusual mix: physics,
mathematics, chemistry, botany, paleontology, and plant
physiology. Christian Doppler, discoverer of the Doppler
effect, was one of his teachers. The cross-pollination of
ideas from several disciplines would play a significant role
in Mendel’s discoveries. One year after he returned to
Brünn, he began his series of seminal genetic experiments.
Figure 2.5 shows where Mendel worked and the microscope he used.
Mendel Devised a New Experimental
Approach
Before Mendel, many misconceptions clouded people’s
thinking about heredity. Two of the prevailing errors were
particularly misleading. The first was that one parent contributes most to an offspring’s inherited features; Nicolaas
Hartsoeker, one of the earliest microscopists, contended in
1694 that it was the male, by way of a fully formed homunculus inside the sperm (Fig. 2.6). Another deceptive notion
was the concept of blended inheritance, the idea that parental traits become mixed and forever changed in the offspring, as when blue and yellow pigments merge to green
on a painter’s palette. The theory of blending may have
grown out of a natural tendency for parents to see a combination of their own traits in their offspring. While blending
could account for children who look like a combination of
their parents, it could not explain obvious differences between biological brothers and sisters nor the persistence of
variation within extended families.
The experiments Mendel devised would lay these
myths to rest by providing precise, verifiable answers to the
three questions Abbot Napp had raised almost 15 years earlier: What is inherited? How is it inherited? What is the role of chance in heredity? A key component of Mendel’s
breakthrough was the way he set up his experiments.
What did Mendel do differently from those who
preceded him? First, he chose the garden pea (Pisum sativum) as his experimental organism (Figs. 2.7a and b).
Peas grew well in Brünn, and with male and female organs
in the same flower, they were normally self-fertilizing. In self-fertilization (or selfing), both egg and pollen come
from the same plant. The particular anatomy of pea flowers, however, makes it easy to prevent self-fertilization and
instead to cross-fertilize (or cross) two individuals by
brushing pollen from one plant onto a female organ of
another plant, as illustrated in Fig. 2.7c. Peas offered yet
another advantage. For each successive generation, Mendel
could obtain large numbers of individuals within a relatively short growing season. By comparison, if he had
worked with sheep, each mating would have generated only
a few offspring and the time between generations would
have been several years.
Second, Mendel examined the inheritance of clear-cut
alternative forms of particular traits—purple versus white
flowers, yellow versus green peas. Using such either-or
traits, he could distinguish and trace unambiguously the
transmission of one or the other observed characteristic,
because no intermediate forms existed. (The opposite of
these so-called discrete traits are continuous traits, such
as height and skin color in humans. Continuous traits show
many intermediate forms.)
Third, Mendel collected and perpetuated lines of peas
that bred true. Matings within such pure-breeding (or
true-breeding) lines produce offspring carrying specific
parental traits that remain constant from generation to generation. These lines are also called inbred because they
have been mated only to each other for many generations.
Mendel observed his pure-breeding lines for up to eight
generations. Plants with white flowers always produced
offspring with white flowers; plants with purple flowers
produced only offspring with purple flowers. Mendel
called constant but mutually exclusive, alternative traits,
such as purple versus white flowers or yellow versus green
seeds antagonistic pairs, and he settled on seven such pairs
for his study (Fig. 2.8). In his experiments, Mendel not
only perpetuated pure-breeding stocks for each member of
a pair, but he also cross-fertilized pairs of plants to produce
hybrids, offspring of genetically dissimilar parents, for
each pair of antagonistic traits. Figure 2.8 shows the
appearance of the hybrids he studied.
Fourth, being an expert plant breeder, Mendel carefully controlled his matings, going to great lengths to
ensure that the progeny he observed really resulted from
the specific fertilizations he intended. Thus Mendel
painstakingly prevented the intrusion of any foreign pollen and assured self- or cross-pollination as the experiment demanded. Not only did this allow him to carry out
controlled breedings of selected traits, but he could also
make reciprocal crosses. In such crosses, he reversed
the traits of the male and female parents, thus controlling
whether a particular trait was transmitted via the egg cell
within the ovule or via a sperm cell within the pollen. For
example, he could use pollen from a purple flower to
fertilize the eggs of a white flower and also use pollen
from a white flower to fertilize the eggs of a purple
flower. Because the progeny of these reciprocal crosses
were similar, Mendel demonstrated that the two parents
contribute equally to inheritance. “It is immaterial to the
form of the hybrid,” he wrote, “which of the parental
types was the seed or pollen plant.”
Fifth, Mendel worked with large numbers of plants,
counted all offspring, subjected his findings to numerical
analysis, and then compared his results with predictions
based on his models. He was the first person to study inheritance in this manner, and no doubt his background in
physics and mathematics contributed to this quantitative
approach. Mendel’s careful numerical analysis revealed
patterns of transmission that reflected basic laws of
heredity.
Finally, Mendel was a brilliant practical experimentalist. When comparing tall and short plants, for example, he
made sure that the short ones were out of the shade of the
tall ones so their growth would not be stunted. Eventually
he focused on certain traits of the pea seeds themselves,
such as their color or shape, rather than on traits of the
plants arising from the seeds. In this way, he could observe
many more individuals from the limited space of the monastery garden, and he could evaluate the results of a cross
in a single growing season.
In short, Mendel purposely set up a simplified blackand-white experimental system and then figured out how it
worked. He did not look at the vast number of variables
that determine the development of a prize ram nor at the
origin of differences between species. Rather, he looked at
discrete traits that came in two mutually exclusive forms
and asked questions that could be answered by observation
and computation.
 People practiced artificial selection of crop plants and
domestic animals for thousands of years without
understanding how heredity works.
•	 Mendel established pure-breeding lines of peas in which
a specific characteristic would remain constant from one
generation to the next.
•	 When Mendel crossed pure-breeding lines with
alternative traits, the hybrid progeny always had the
characteristics of one parent.
•	 In Mendel’s experiments, the hybrid progeny produced by
reciprocal cross-fertilizations had the same characteristics; it
did not matter which parent was male and which was female.
Figure 2.5 Mendel’s garden and microscope. (a) Gregor
Mendel’s garden was part of his monastery’s property in Brünn.
(b) Mendel used this microscope to examine plant reproductive
organs and to pursue his interests in natural history.
(a): © Biophoto Associates/Science Source; (b): © James King-Holmes/
Figure 2.6 The homunculus: A misconception. Well into the
nineteenth century, many prominent microscopists believed they saw
a fully formed, miniature fetus crouched within the head of a sperm.
© Klaus Guldbrandsen/SPL/
Figure 2.7 Mendel’s experimental organism: The garden pea. (a) Pea plants with white flowers. (b) Pollen is produced in the
anthers. Mature pollen lands on the stigma, which is connected to the ovary (which becomes the pea pod). After landing, the pollen grows a
tube that extends through the stigma to one of the ovules (immature seeds), allowing fertilization to take place. (c) To prevent self-fertilization,
breeders remove the anthers from the female parents (here, the white flower) before the plant produces mature pollen. Pollen is then
transferred with a paintbrush from the anthers of the male parent (here, the purple flower) to the stigma of the female parent. Each fertilized
ovule becomes an individual pea (mature seed) that can grow into a new pea plant. All of the peas produced from one flower are encased in
the same pea pod, but these peas form from different pollen grains and ovules.
Pisum sativum (b) Pea flower anatomy (c) Cross-pollination
Stigma
Ovules
within
ovary
Anthers
pollen
transferred,
dusted onto
stigma of
recipient
Seed
formation
Seed
germination
Anthers
removed
previously

Figure 2.8 The mating of parents with antagonistic
traits produces hybrids. Note that each of the hybrids for the
seven antagonistic traits studied by Mendel resembles only one of
the parents. The parental trait that shows up in the hybrid is known
as the dominant trait.
Antagonistic Pairs Appearance of Hybrid
(dominant trait)
Seed color (interior)
Yellow Green Yellow
Seed shape
Round Wrinkled Round
Stem length
Long Short Long
Flower position
Along stem At tip of stem Along stem
Genetic Analysis According
to Mendel
learning objectives
1. Explain Mendel’s law of segregation and how it predicts
the 3:1 dominant-to-recessive phenotypic ratio among
the F2 generation of a monohybrid cross.
2. Distinguish between a monohybrid cross and a testcross.
3. Explain Mendel’s law of independent assortment and
how the 9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio among the F2 of a
dihybrid cross provides evidence for this law.
4. Interpret phenotypic ratios of progeny to infer how
particular traits are inherited.
5. Predict the genotypic and phenotypic ratios among
progeny of complex multihybrid crosses using simple
rules of probability.
6. Cite the most common molecular explanations for
dominant and recessive alleles
In early 1865 at the age of 43, Gregor Mendel presented a
paper entitled Experiments on Plant Hybrids before the
Natural Science Society of Brünn. Despite its modest heading, this was a scientific paper of uncommon clarity and
simplicity that summarized a decade of original observations and experiments. In it Mendel describes in detail the
transmission of visible characteristics in pea plants, defines
unseen but logically deduced units (genes) that determine
when and how often these visible traits appear, and analyzes the behavior of genes in simple mathematical terms
to reveal previously unsuspected principles of heredity.
Published the following year, the paper would eventually become the cornerstone of modern genetics. Its stated
purpose was to see whether there is a “generally applicable
law governing the formation and development of hybrids.”
Let us examine its insights 
Monohybrid Crosses Reveal
the Law of Segregation
Once Mendel had isolated pure-breeding lines for several
sets of characteristics, he carried out a series of matings
between individuals that differed in only one trait, such as
seed color or stem length. In each cross, one parent carries
one form of the trait, and the other parent carries an alternative form of the same trait. Figure 2.9 illustrates one such
mating. Early in the spring of 1854, for example, Mendel
planted pure-breeding green peas and pure-breeding yellow
peas and allowed them to grow into the parental (P)
generation. Later that spring when the plants had flowered,
he dusted the female stigma of green-pea plant flowers with
pollen from yellow-pea plants. He also performed the reciprocal cross, dusting yellow-pea plant stigmas with greenpea pollen. In the fall, when he collected and separately
analyzed the progeny peas of these reciprocal crosses, he
found that in both cases, the peas were all yellow.
These yellow peas, progeny of the P generation, were
the beginning of what we now call the first filial (F1) generation. To learn whether the green trait had disappeared
entirely or remained intact but hidden in these F1 yellow
peas, Mendel planted them to obtain mature F1 plants that
he allowed to self-fertilize. Such experiments involving hybrids for a single trait are often called monohybrid crosses.
He then harvested and counted the peas of the resulting
second filial (F2) generation, progeny of the F1 generation.
Among the progeny of one series of F1 self-fertilizations,
there were 6022 yellow and 2001 green F2 peas, an almost
perfect ratio of 3 yellow : 1 green. F1 plants derived from
the reciprocal of the original cross produced a similar ratio
of yellow to green F2 progeny.
Reappearance of the recessive trait
The presence of green peas in the F2 generation was irrefutable evidence that blending had not occurred. If it had, the
information necessary to make green peas would have been
lost irretrievably in the F1 hybrids. Instead, the information
remained intact and was able to direct the formation of
2001 green peas actually harvested from the second filial
generation. These green peas were indistinguishable from
their green grandparents.
Mendel concluded that two types of yellow peas must
exist: those that breed true like the yellow peas of the P
generation, and those that can yield some green offspring
like the yellow F1 hybrids. This second type somehow contains latent information for green peas. He called the trait
that appeared in all the F1 hybrids—in this case, yellow
seeds—dominant (see Fig. 2.8) and the antagonistic
green-pea trait that remained hidden in the F1 hybrids but
reappeared in the F2 generation recessive. But how did he
explain the 3:1 ratio of yellow to green F2 peas?
Genes: Discrete units of inheritance
To account for his observations, Mendel proposed that for
each trait, every plant carries two copies of a unit of inheritance, receiving one from its maternal parent and the
other from the paternal parent. Today, we call these units of
inheritance genes. Each unit determines the appearance of
a specific characteristic. The pea plants in Mendel’s collection had two copies of a gene for seed color, two copies of
another for seed shape, two copies of a third for stem
length, and so forth.
Mendel further proposed that each gene comes in alternative forms, and combinations of these alternative forms
determine the contrasting characteristics he was studying.
Today we call the alternative forms of a single gene alleles.
The gene for pea color, for example, has yellow and green
alleles; the gene for pea shape has round and wrinkled alleles. In Mendel’s monohybrid crosses, one allele of each
gene was dominant, the other recessive. In the P generation,
one parent carried two dominant alleles for the trait under
consideration; the other parent, two recessive alleles. The F1
generation hybrids carried one dominant and one recessive
allele for the trait. Individuals having two different alleles
for a single trait are monohybrids.
The law of segregation
If a plant has two copies of every gene, how does it pass
only one copy of each to its progeny? And how do the offspring then end up with two copies of these same genes, one from each parent? Mendel drew on his background in plant
physiology and answered these questions in terms of the
two biological mechanisms behind reproduction: gamete
formation and the random union of gametes at fertilization.
Gametes are the specialized cells—eggs within the
ovules of the female parent and sperm cells within the pollen grains—that carry genes between generations. Mendel
imagined that during the formation of eggs and sperm, the
two copies of each gene in the parent separate (or segregate) so that each gamete receives only one allele for each
trait (Fig. 2.10a). Thus, each egg and each sperm receives
only one allele for pea color (either yellow or green).
At fertilization, a sperm with one or the other allele
unites at random with an egg carrying one or the other allele, restoring the two copies of the gene for each trait in the
fertilized egg, or zygote (Fig. 2.10b). If the sperm carries
yellow and the egg green, the result will be a hybrid yellow
pea like the F1 monohybrids that resulted when pure-breeding
parents of opposite types mated. If the yellow-carrying
sperm unites with a yellow-carrying egg, the result will be
a yellow pea that grows into a pure-breeding plant like
those of the P generation that produced only yellow peas.
And finally, if sperm carrying the allele for green peas
fertilizes a green-carrying egg, the progeny will be a
pure-breeding green pea.
Mendel’s law of segregation encapsulates this general
principle of heredity: The two alleles for each trait separate
(segregate) during gamete formation, and then unite at random, one from each parent, at fertilization. Throughout this
book, the term segregation refers to such equal segregation
in which one allele, and only one allele, of each gene goes
to each gamete. Note that the law of segregation makes a
clear distinction between the somatic cells (body cells) of
an organism, which have two copies of each gene, and the
gametes, which bear only a single copy of each gene.
The Punnett square
Figure 2.11 shows a simple way of visualizing the results
of the segregation and random union of alleles during gamete formation and fertilization. Mendel invented a system
of symbols that allowed him to analyze all his crosses in the
same way. He designated dominant alleles with a capital A,
B, or C and recessive ones with a lowercase a, b, or c.
Modern geneticists have adopted this convention for naming genes in peas and many other organisms, but they often
choose a symbol with some reference to the trait in question—
a Y for yellow or an R for round. Throughout this book, we
present gene symbols in italics. In Fig. 2.11, we denote the
dominant yellow allele with a capital Y and the recessive
green allele with a lowercase y. The pure-breeding plants
of the parental generation are either YY (yellow peas) or yy
(green peas). The YY parent can produce only Y gametes,
the yy parent only y gametes. You can see in Fig. 2.11 why
every cross between YY and yy produces exactly the same
result—a Yy hybrid—no matter which parent (male or
female) contributes which particular allele.

Next, to visualize what happens when the Yy hybrids
self-fertilize, we set up a Punnett square (named after the
British mathematician Reginald Punnett, who introduced it
in 1906; Fig. 2.11). The square provides a simple and convenient method for tracking the kinds of gametes produced
as well as all the possible combinations that might occur at
fertilization. As the Punnett square shows in the first column
and the first row, each hybrid produces two kinds of gametes, Y and y, in a ratio of 1:1. Thus, half the sperm and half
the eggs carry Y, the other half of each gamete type carries y.
Each box in the Punnett square in Fig. 2.11 containing
a colored pea represents one possible fertilization event. At
fertilization, 1/4 of the progeny will be YY, 1/4 Yy, 1/4 yY,
and 1/4 yy. Because the gametic source of an allele (egg or
sperm) for the traits Mendel studied had no influence on
the allele’s effect, Yy and yY are equivalent. This means
that 1/2 of the progeny are yellow Yy hybrids, 1/4 YY
true-breeding yellows, and 1/4 true-breeding yy greens.
The diagram illustrates how the segregation of alleles during gamete formation and the random union of egg and
sperm at fertilization can produce the 3:1 ratio of yellow to
green that Mendel observed in the F2 generation.
Mendel’s Results Reflect Basic
Rules of Probability
Though you may not have realized it, the Punnett square
illustrates two simple rules of probability—the product
rule and the sum rule—that are central to the analysis of
genetic crosses. These rules predict the likelihood that a
particular combination of events will occur.
The product rule
The product rule states that the probability of two or more
independent events occurring together is the product of the
probabilities that each event will occur by itself. With independent events:
Probability of event 1 and event 2 =
Probability of event 1 × probability of event 2.
Consecutive coin tosses are obviously independent
events; a heads in one toss neither increases nor decreases
the probability of a heads in the next toss. If you toss two
coins at the same time, the results are also independent
events. A heads for one coin neither increases nor decreases
the probability of a heads for the other coin. Thus, the probability of a given combination is the product of their independent probabilities. For example, the probability that
both coins will turn up heads is:
1/2 × 1/2 = 1/4.
Similarly, the formation of egg and sperm are independent
events; in a hybrid plant, the probability is 1/2 that a given gamete will carry Y and 1/2 that it will carry y. Because
fertilization happens at random, the probability that a particular combination of maternal and paternal alleles will
occur simultaneously in the same zygote is the product of
the independent probabilities of these alleles being packaged in egg and sperm. Thus, to find the chance of a Y egg
(formed as the result of one event) uniting with a Y sperm
(the result of an independent event), you simply multiply
1/2 × 1/2 to get 1/4. This is the same fraction of YY progeny
seen in the Punnett square of Fig. 2.11, which demonstrates
that the Punnett square is simply another way of depicting
the product rule. It is important to realize that each box
in the Punnett square represents an equally likely outcome
of the cross (an equally likely fertilization event) only
because each of the two types of sperm and eggs (Y and y)
are produced at equal frequencies.
The sum rule
While we can describe the moment of random fertilization
as the simultaneous occurrence of two independent events,
we can also say that two different fertilization events are
mutually exclusive. For instance, if Y combines with Y, it
cannot also combine with y in the same zygote. A second
rule of probability, the sum rule, states that the probability
of either of two such mutually exclusive events occurring
is the sum of their individual probabilities. With mutually
exclusive events:
Probability of event 1 or event 2 =
Probability of event 1 + probability of event 2.
To find the likelihood that an offspring of a Yy hybrid
self-fertilization will be a hybrid like the parents, you add
1/4 (the probability of maternal Y uniting with paternal y)
and 1/4 (the probability of the mutually exclusive event
where paternal Y unites with maternal y) to get 1/2, again
the same result as in the Punnett square.
In another use of the sum rule, you could predict the
ratio of yellow to green F2 progeny. The fraction of F2 peas
that will be yellow is the sum of 1/4 (the event producing
YY) plus 1/4 (the mutually exclusive event generating Yy)
plus 1/4 (the mutually exclusive event producing yY)
to get 3/4. The remaining 1/4 of the F2 progeny will be
green. So the yellow-to-green ratio is 3/4 to 1/4, or more
simply, 3:1.

Analyzing a monohybrid cross. Cross-pollination
of pure-breeding parental plants produces F1 hybrids, all of which
resemble one of the parents. Self-pollination of F1 plants gives rise
to an F2 generation with a 3:1 ratio of individuals resembling the
two original parental types. For simplicity, we do not show the
plants that produce the peas or that grow from the planted peas.
Generation
Yellow peas Green peas
All yellow
Self-fertilization
6022 yellow : 2001 green
3 : 1
The law of segregation. (a) The two identical
alleles of pure-breeding plants separate (segregate) during gamete
formation. As a result, each sperm or egg carries only one of each
pair of parental alleles. (b) Cross-pollination and fertilization
between pure-breeding parents with antagonistic traits result in F1
hybrid zygotes with two different alleles. For the seed color gene,
a Yy hybrid zygote will develop into a yellow pea.
The two alleles for each trait separate during gamete
formation.
YY yellow pea
from a pure-breeding
stock
Grows into plant Gamete
formation
Grows into plant Gamete
formation
Gametes
(sperm or eggs)
yy green pea
from a pure-breeding
stock
Two gametes, one from each parent, unite at random
at fertilization.
Gametes
(one sperm, one egg)
Zygote F1 Hybrid
Fertilization
Seed
development
yellow pea
showing
dominant trait
yellow-determining allele of pea color gene
= green-determining allele of pea color gene
Figure 2.11 The Punnett square: Visual summary of a
cross. This Punnett square illustrates the combinations that can arise
when an F1 hybrid undergoes gamete formation and self-fertilization.
The F2 generation should have a 3:1 ratio of yellow to green peas
Gametes
F1 (all identical)
y yY
F2
yy
YY
Y
Y Yy
y
Eggs
Sperm
Each box:
1/2 × 1/2 = 1/4
Figure 2.12 Yellow F2 peas are of two types: Pure
breeding and hybrid. The distribution of a pair of contrasting
alleles (Y and y) after two generations of self-fertilization. The
homozygous individuals of each generation breed true, whereas
the hybrids do not.
Selffertilization
Selffertilization
Further Crosses Verify
the Law of Segregation
The law of segregation was a hypothesis that explained the
data from simple crosses involving monohybrid peas, but
Mendel needed to perform additional experiments to check
its validity. Mendel’s hypothesis, summarized in Fig. 2.11,
made the testable prediction that the F2 should have two kinds of yellow peas (YY and Yy) but only one kind of green
pea (yy). In addition, his hypothesis predicted that the YY
and Yy yellow peas in the F2 should be present in a ratio of
1YY : 2Yy.
To verify these expectations, Mendel allowed selffertilization of all the plants in the F2 generation and
counted the types of F3 progeny (Fig. 2.12). He found
that the plants that developed from F2 green peas all produced only green peas in the F3, and when the resulting
F3 plants self-fertilized, the next generation (the F4) also
produced green peas (not shown). This is what we (and
Mendel) would expect of pure-breeding yy lines carrying
two copies of the recessive allele. The yellow peas were
a different story. When Mendel allowed 518 F2 plants
that developed from yellow peas to self-fertilize, he observed that 166, roughly 1/3 of the total, were pure-breeding yellow through several generations, but the other 352
(2/3 of the total yellow F2 plants) were hybrids because
they gave rise to yellow and green F3 peas in a ratio of
3:1. Therefore, as Mendel’s theory anticipated, the ratio
of YY to Yy among the 518 F2 yellow pea plants was
indeed 1:2.
It took Mendel years to conduct such rigorous experiments on seven pairs of pea traits, but in the end, he was
able to conclude that the segregation of dominant and
recessive alleles during gamete formation and their random union at fertilization could indeed explain the 3:1
ratios he observed whenever he allowed hybrids to
self-fertilize. His results, however, raised yet another
question, one of some importance to future plant and animal breeders. Plants showing a dominant trait, such as
yellow peas, can be either pure-breeding (YY) or hybrid
(Yy). How can you distinguish one from the other? For
self-fertilizing plants, the answer is to observe the appearance of the next generation. But how would you distinguish pure-breeding from hybrid individuals in species
that do not self-fertilize?
Figure 2.13 Genotype versus phenotype in homozygotes
and heterozygotes. The relationship between genotype and
phenotype with a pair of contrasting alleles where one allele (Y)
shows complete dominance over the other (y).
Genotype for the Seed
Color Gene
Phenotype
Yellow
Yellow
Green
Homozygous dominant
Heterozygous
Homozygous recessive
Dominant
allele
Recessive
allele
Cross A Cross B
Ospring all yellow Ospring 1:1 yellow to green
Figure 2.14 How a testcross reveals genotype. An individual
of unknown genotype, but dominant phenotype, is crossed with a
homozygous recessive. If the unknown genotype is homozygous, all
progeny will exhibit the dominant phenotype (cross A). If the unknown
genotype is heterozygous, half the progeny will exhibit the dominant
trait, half the recessive trait (cross B).
Testcrosses: A way to establish genotype
Before describing Mendel’s answer, we need to define a
few more terms. An observable characteristic, such as yellow or green pea seeds, is a phenotype, while the actual
pair of alleles present in an individual is its genotype. A YY
or a yy genotype is called homozygous, because the two
copies of the gene that determine the particular trait in
question are the same. In contrast, a genotype with two different alleles for a trait is heterozygous; in other words, it
is a hybrid for that trait (Fig. 2.13). An individual with a
homozygous genotype is a homozygote; one with a heterozygous genotype is a heterozygote.
Note that the phenotype of a heterozygote (that is, of a
hybrid) defines which allele is dominant: Because Yy peas
are yellow, the yellow allele Y is dominant to the y allele for
green. If you know the genotype and the dominance relation of the alleles, you can accurately predict the phenotype. The reverse is not true, however, because some
phenotypes can derive from more than one genotype. For
example, the phenotype of yellow peas can result from
either the YY or the Yy genotype.
With these distinctions in mind, we can look at the
method Mendel devised for deciphering the unknown genotype. We’ll call it Y–, responsible for a dominant phenotype; the dash represents the unknown second allele, either
Y or y. This method, called the testcross, is a mating in
which an individual showing the dominant phenotype, for
instance, a Y– plant grown from a yellow pea, is crossed
with an individual expressing the recessive phenotype, in
this case a yy plant grown from a green pea. As the Punnett
squares in Fig. 2.14 illustrate, if the dominant phenotype in
question derives from a homozygous YY genotype, all the
offspring of the testcross will show the dominant yellow
phenotype. But if the dominant parent of unknown genotype is a heterozygous hybrid (Yy), half of the progeny are
expected to be yellow peas, and the other half green. In this  way, the testcross establishes the genotype behind a dominant phenotype, resolving any uncertainty.
As we mentioned earlier, Mendel deliberately simplified the problem of heredity, focusing on traits that come in
only two forms. He was able to replicate his basic monohybrid findings with corn, beans, and four-o’clocks (plants
with tubular, white or bright red flowers). As it turns out,
his concept of the gene and his law of segregation can be
generalized to almost all sexually reproducing organisms.
Dihybrid Crosses Reveal the Law
of Independent Assortment
Having determined from monohybrid crosses that genes
are inherited according to the law of segregation, Mendel
turned his attention to the simultaneous inheritance of two
or more apparently unrelated traits in peas. He asked how
two pairs of alleles would segregate in a dihybrid individual, that is, in a plant that is heterozygous for two genes at
the same time.
To construct such a dihybrid, Mendel mated truebreeding plants grown from yellow round peas (YY RR)
with true-breeding plants grown from green wrinkled peas
(yy rr). From this cross he obtained a dihybrid F1 generation (Yy Rr) showing the two dominant phenotypes, yellow
and round (Fig. 2.15). He then allowed these F1 dihybrids
to self-fertilize to produce the F2 generation. Mendel could
not predict the outcome of this mating. Would all the F2
progeny be parental types that looked like either the original yellow round parent or the green wrinkled parent? Or
would some new combinations of phenotypes occur that
were not seen in the parental lines, such as yellow wrinkled
or green round peas? New phenotypic combinations like
these are called recombinant types.
Figure 2.15 A dihybrid cross produces parental types
and recombinant types. In this dihybrid cross, pure-breeding
parents (P) produce a genetically uniform generation of F1 dihybrids.
Self-pollination or cross-pollination of the F1 plants yields the
characteristic F2 phenotypic ratio of 9:3:3:1.
Parental
Recombinant
Recombinant
Parental
Y– R–
yy R–
Y– rr
yy rr
yellow round
green round
yellow wrinkled
green wrinkled
Number
315
108
101
32
Phenotypic
9/16
3/16
3/16
1/16
Ratio of yellow (dominant) to green (recessive) = 12:4 or 3:1
Ratio of round (dominant) to wrinkled (recessive) = 12:4 or 3:1
When Mendel counted the F2 generation of one experiment, he found 315 yellow round peas, 108 green round,
101 yellow wrinkled, and 32 green wrinkled. Both yellow
wrinkled and green round recombinant phenotypes did, in
fact, appear, providing evidence that some shuffling of the
alleles of different genes had taken place.
The law of independent assortment
From the observed ratios, Mendel inferred the biological
mechanism of that shuffling—the independent assortment
of gene pairs during gamete formation. Because the genes
for pea color and for pea shape assort independently, the
allele for pea shape in a gamete carrying Y could with equal
likelihood be either R or r. Thus, the presence of a particular allele of one gene, say, the dominant Y for pea color,
provides no information whatsoever about the allele of the
second gene. Each dihybrid of the F1 generation can therefore make four kinds of gametes: Y R, Y r, y R, and y r. In a
large number of gametes, the four kinds will appear in an
almost perfect ratio of 1:1:1:1, or put another way, roughly
1/4 of the eggs and 1/4 of the sperm will contain each of the
four possible combinations of alleles. That “the different
kinds of germinal cells [eggs or sperm] of a hybrid are produced on the average in equal numbers” was yet another
one of Mendel’s incisive insights.
At fertilization then, in a mating of dihybrids, 4 different kinds of eggs can each combine with any 1 of 4 different
kinds of sperm, producing a total of 16 possible zygotes.
Once again, a Punnett square is a convenient way to visualize the process (Fig. 2.15). Using the same kind of logic
previously applied to the Punnett square for monohybrid
crosses (review Fig. 2.11), each of the 16 boxes with colored
peas in the Punnett square for the dihybrid cross in Fig. 2.15
represents an equally likely fertilization event. Again, each
box is an equally likely outcome only because each of the
different gamete types is produced at equal frequency in
each parent. Therefore, using the product rule, the frequency
of the progeny type in each box is 1/4 × 1/4 = 1/16.
If you look at the square in Fig. 2.15, you will see that
some of the 16 potential allelic combinations are identical.
In fact, only nine different genotypes exist—YY RR, YY Rr,
Yy RR, Yy Rr, yy RR, yy Rr, YY rr, Yy rr, and yy rr—because
the source of the alleles (egg or sperm) does not make any
difference. If you look at the combinations of traits
determined by the nine genotypes, you will see only four
phenotypes—yellow round, green round, yellow wrinkled,
and green wrinkled—in a ratio of 9:3:3:1. If, however, you
look only at pea color or only at pea shape, you can see that
each trait is inherited in the 3:1 ratio predicted by Mendel’s
law of segregation. In the Punnett square, there are 12 yellow for every 4 green and 12 round for every 4 wrinkled. In
other words, the ratio of each dominant trait (yellow or
round) to its antagonistic recessive trait (green or wrinkled)
is 12:4, or 3:1. This means that the inheritance of the gene
for pea color is unaffected by the inheritance of the gene for
pea shape, and vice versa.
The preceding analysis became the basis of Mendel’s
second general genetic principle, the law of independent
assortment: During gamete formation, different pairs of
alleles segregate independently of each other (Fig. 2.16). The
independence of their segregation and the subsequent random
union of gametes at fertilization determine the phenotypes
observed. Using the product rule for assessing the probability
of independent events, you can see mathematically how the
9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio observed in a dihybrid cross derives
from two separate 3:1 phenotypic ratios. If the two sets of alleles assort independently, the yellow-to-green ratio in the
F2 generation will be 3/4 : 1/4, and likewise, the round-towrinkled ratio will be 3/4 : 1/4. To find the probability that
two independent events such as yellow and round will occur
simultaneously in the same plant, you multiply as follows:
Probability of yellow round = 3/4 × 3/4 = 9/16
Probability of green round = 1/4 × 3/4 = 3/16
Probability of yellow wrinkled = 3/4 × 1/4 = 3/16
Probability of green wrinkled = 1/4 × 1/4 = 1/16
Thus, in a population of F2 plants, there will be a
9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio of yellow round to green round to
yellow wrinkled to green wrinkled.
Branched-line diagrams
A convenient way to keep track of the probabilities of each
potential outcome in a genetic cross is to construct a
branched-line diagram (Fig. 2.17), which shows all the
possible genotypes or phenotypes for each gene in a sequence of columns. In Fig. 2.17, the first column shows
the two possible pea color phenotypes; the second column
demonstrates that each pea color can occur with either of
two pea shapes. Again, the 9:3:3:1 ratio of phenotypes is
apparent. You will see later that branched-line diagrams
are more convenient than Punnett squares for predicting the
outcomes of crosses involving more than two genes.
Alleles in
parental cell
Gamete
formation
Possible allele
combinations
in gametes
Figure 2.16 The law of independent assortment. In a
dihybrid cross, each pair of alleles assorts independently during
gamete formation. In the gametes, Y is equally likely to be found with
R or r (that is, Y R = Y r); the same is true for y (that is, y R = y r). As
a result, all four possible types of gametes (Y R, Y r, y R, and y r) are
produced in equal frequency among a large population.
Gene 1
3/4 yellow
1/4 green
3/4 round
3/4 round
1/4 wrinkled
Gene 2 Phenotypes
1/4 wrinkled
9/16 yellow round
3/16 green round
3/16 yellow wrinkled
1/16 green wrinkled
Figure 2.17 Following crosses with branched-line
diagrams. A branched-line diagram, which uses a series of
columns to track every gene in a cross, provides an organized
overview of all possible outcomes. This branched-line diagram of a
dihybrid cross generates the same phenotypic ratios as the Punnett
square in Fig. 2.15, showing that the two methods are equivalent.
Figure 2.18 Testcrosses with dihybrids. Testcrosses involving
two pairs of independently assorting alleles yield different, predictable
results depending on the tested individual’s genotype for the two
genes in question.
Testcrosses with dihybrids
An understanding of dihybrid crosses has many applications. Suppose, for example, that you work for a nursery
that has three pure-breeding strains: yellow wrinkled, green
round, and green wrinkled. Your assignment is to grow
pure-breeding plants guaranteed to produce yellow round
peas. How would you proceed?
One answer is to cross your two pure-breeding strains
(YY rr × yy RR) to generate a dihybrid (Yy Rr). Then selfcross the dihybrid and plant only the yellow round peas.
Only one out of nine of such progeny—those grown from
peas with a YY RR genotype—will be appropriate for your
uses. To find these plants, you could subject each yellow
round candidate to a testcross for genotype with a green
wrinkled (yy rr) plant, as illustrated in Fig. 2.18. If the testcross yields all yellow round offspring (testcross A), you
can sell your test plant, because you know it is homozygous
for both pea color and pea shape. If your testcross yields
1/2 yellow round and 1/2 yellow wrinkled (testcross B), or
1/2 yellow round and 1/2 green round (testcross C), you know
that the candidate plant in question is genetically homozygous
for one trait and heterozygous for the other and must therefore be discarded. Finally, if the testcross yields 1/4 yellow
round, 1/4 yellow wrinkled, 1/4 green round, and 1/4 green
wrinkled (testcross D), you know that the plant is a heterozygote for both the pea color and the pea shape genes.
Geneticists Use Mendel’s Laws
to Calculate Probabilities and
Make Predictions
Mendel performed several sets of dihybrid crosses and also
carried out multihybrid crosses: matings between the F1
progeny of pure-breeding parents that differed in three or
more unrelated traits. In all of these experiments, he observed numbers and ratios very close to what he expected
on the basis of his two general biological principles: The
alleles of a gene segregate during the formation of egg or
sperm, and the alleles of different genes assort independently of each other. Mendel’s laws of inheritance, in conjunction with the mathematical rules of probability, provide
geneticists with powerful tools for predicting and interpreting the results of genetic crosses. But as with all tools, they
have their limitations. We examine here both the power and
the limitations of Mendelian analysis.
First, the power: Using simple Mendelian analysis, it is
possible to make accurate predictions about the offspring
of extremely complex crosses. Suppose you want to predict
the occurrence of one specific genotype in a cross involving several independently assorting genes. For example, if
hybrids that are heterozygous for four traits are allowed to
self-fertilize—Aa Bb Cc Dd × Aa Bb Cc Dd—what proportion of their progeny will have the genotype AA bb Cc Dd?
You could set up a Punnett square to answer the question.
Because for each trait there are two different alleles, the
number of different eggs or sperm is found by raising 2 to
the power of the number of differing traits (2n, where n is
the number of traits). By this calculation, each hybrid parent in this cross with 4 traits would make 24 = 16 different
kinds of gametes. The Punnett square depicting such a
cross would thus contain 256 boxes (16 × 16).
Setting up such a square may be fine if you live in a
monastery with a bit of time on your hands, but not if
you’re taking a 1-hour exam. It would be much simpler to
analyze the problem by breaking down the multihybrid
cross into four independently assorting monohybrid
crosses. Remember that the genotypic ratios of each monohybrid cross are 1 homozygote for the dominant allele, to
2 heterozygotes, to 1 homozygote for the recessive allele = 1/4 : 2/4 : 1/4. Thus, you can find the probability of AA bb
Cc Dd by multiplying the probability of each independent
event: AA (1/4 of the progeny produced by Aa × Aa); bb
(1/4); Cc (2/4); Dd (2/4):
1/4 × 1/4 × 2/4 × 2/4 = 4/256 = 1/64.
The Punnett square approach would provide the same
answer, but it would require much more time.
If instead of a specific genotype, you want to predict
the probability of a certain phenotype, you can again use
the product rule as long as you know the phenotypic ratios
produced by each pair of alleles in the cross. For example,
if in the multihybrid cross of Aa Bb Cc Dd × Aa Bb Cc Dd,
you want to know how many offspring will show the dominant A trait (genotype AA or Aa = 1/4 + 2/4, or 3/4), the
recessive b trait (genotype bb = 1/4), the dominant C trait
(genotype CC or Cc = 3/4), and the dominant D trait (genotype DD or Dd = 3/4), you simply multiply:
3/4 × 1/4 × 3/4 × 3/4 = 27/256.
In this way, the rules of probability make it possible to predict the outcome of very complex crosses.
You can see from these examples that particular problems in genetics are amenable to particular modes of analysis.
As a rule of thumb, Punnett squares are excellent for visualizing simple crosses involving a few genes, but they become
unwieldy in the dissection of more complicated matings.
Direct calculations of probabilities, such as those in the two
preceding problems, are useful when you want to know the
chances of one or a few outcomes of complex crosses. If,
however, you want to know all the outcomes of a multihybrid
cross, a branched-line diagram is the best way to go as it will
keep track of all the possibilities in an organized fashion.
Now, the limitations of Mendelian analysis: Like Mendel,
if you were to breed pea plants or corn or any other organism, you would most likely observe some deviation from the
ratios you expected in each generation. What can account for
such variation? One element is chance, as witnessed in the
common coin toss experiment. With each throw, the probability of the coin coming up heads is equal to the likelihood
it will come up tails. But if you toss a coin 10 times, you may
get 30% (3) heads and 70% (7) tails, or vice versa. If you toss
it 100 times, you are more likely to get a result closer to the
expected 50% heads and 50% tails. The larger the number of
trials, the lower the probability that chance significantly
skews the data. The statistical benefit is one reason Mendel
worked with large numbers of pea plants.
Mendel’s laws, in fact, have great predictive power for
populations of organisms, but they do not tell us what will
happen in any one individual. With a garden full of selffertilizing monohybrid pea plants, for example, you can
expect that 3/4 of the F2 progeny will show the dominant
phenotype and 1/4 the recessive, but you cannot predict the
phenotype of any particular F2 plant. In Chapter 5, we discuss mathematical methods for assessing whether the  chance variation observed in a sample of individuals within
a population is compatible with a genetic hypothesis.
Mendel’s Genius Was Unappreciated
Before 1900
Mendel’s insights into the workings of heredity were a
breakthrough of monumental proportions. By counting and
analyzing data from hundreds of pea plant crosses, he inferred the existence of genes—independent units that determine the observable patterns of inheritance for particular
traits. His work explained the reappearance of hidden traits,
disproved the idea of blended inheritance, and showed that
mother and father make an equal genetic contribution to the
next generation. The model of heredity that he formulated
was so specific that he could test predictions based on it by
observation and experiment.
With the exception of Abbot Napp, none of Mendel’s
contemporaries appreciated the importance of his research.
Mendel did not teach at a prestigious university and was not
well known outside Brünn. Even in Brünn, members of the
Natural Science Society were disappointed when he presented Experiments on Plant Hybrids to them. They wanted
to view and discuss intriguing mutants and lovely flowers,
so they did not appreciate his numerical analyses. Mendel,
it seems, was far ahead of his time. Sadly, despite written
requests from Mendel that others try to replicate his studies,
no one repeated his experiments. Several citations of his
paper between 1866 and 1900 referred to his expertise as a
plant breeder but made no mention of his laws. Moreover, at
the time Mendel presented his work, no one had yet seen the
structures within cells, the chromosomes, that actually carry
the genes. That would happen only in the next few decades
(as described in Chapter 4). If scientists had been able to see
these structures, they might have more readily accepted
Mendel’s ideas, because the chromosomes are actual physical structures that behave exactly as Mendel predicted.
The science of genetics begins with the rediscovery of Mendel. Working independently near the beginning of
the twentieth century, Correns, de Vries, and von Tschermak each came to the same conclusions as those Mendel summarized in his laws.
(a, c): © SPL/Science Source; (b): © INTERFOTO/Alamy; (d): © ullstein bild/Getty Images
Mendel’s work might have had an important influence
on early debates about evolution if it had been more widely
appreciated. Charles Darwin (1809–1882), who was unfamiliar with Mendel’s work, was plagued in his later years by
criticism that his explanations for the persistence of variation
in organisms were insufficient. Darwin considered such variation a cornerstone of his theory of evolution, maintaining
that natural selection would favor particular variants in a
given population in a given environment. If the selected combinations of variant traits were passed on to subsequent generations, this transmission of variation would propel evolution.
He could not, however, say how that transmission might occur. Had Darwin been aware of Mendel’s ideas, he might not
have been backed into such an uncomfortable corner.
For 34 years, Mendel’s laws lay dormant—untested,
unconfirmed, and unapplied. Then in 1900, 16 years after
Mendel’s death, Carl Correns, Hugo de Vries, and Erich
von Tschermak independently rediscovered and acknowledged his work (Fig. 2.19). The scientific community had
finally caught up with Mendel. Within a decade, investigators had coined many of the modern terms we have been
using: phenotype, genotype, homozygote, heterozygote,
gene, and genetics, the label given to the twentieth-century
science of heredity. Mendel’s paper provided the new discipline’s foundation. His principles and analytic techniques
endure today, guiding geneticists and evolutionary biologists in their studies of genetic variation.
The Influence of Molecules on Phenotype
Determines Whether Alleles are
Dominant or Recessive
We now know that genes specify the proteins (and RNAs)
that cells produce and that dictate cellular structure and
function. Recently, two genes were identified that are likely
to correspond to Mendel’s genes for seed shape and seed color. The pea shape gene specifies an enzyme known as
Sbe1 (for Starch-branching enzyme 1). Sbe1 catalyzes the
conversion of amylose, an unbranched linear molecule of
starch, to amylopectin, a starch molecule composed of several branching chains (Fig. 2.20a). The dominant R allele
of the pea shape gene determines a normal, functioning
Sbe1 enzyme. In contrast, the recessive allele r specifies
no Sbe1 enzyme. As a result, RR homozygotes contain a
high proportion of branched starch molecules, which allows the peas to maintain a rounded shape. In homozygous
recessive rr peas, sucrose builds up because less of it is converted into starch. The excess sucrose modifies the osmotic pressure, causing water to enter the young seeds. As
the seeds mature, they lose the water, shrink, and wrinkle.
The single dominant allele in Rr heterozygotes apparently
specifies enough of the normal Sbe1 enzyme to prevent
wrinkling.
The pea color gene determines an enzyme called Sgr (for
Stay green). Sgr performs one step in the pathway leading
to the breakdown of the green pigment chlorophyll, a
process that occurs naturally in peas as they mature
(Fig. 2.20b). The dominant Y allele specifies Sgr, and the recessive y allele does not. Homozygous YY or heterozygous Yy peas are yellow because they each have enough Sgr
to break down all the chlorophyll. Homozygous yy peas
stay green because they lack the Sgr enzyme, and the chlorophyll remains.
Two general principles emerge from these molecular
discoveries. First, a specific gene determines a specific
protein (in these cases an enzyme). The activity of the
protein may affect the phenotype of the pea plant in any
number of ways, depending on the biochemical pathway
in which it functions. Second, a pattern can be seen in
both of these examples: The dominant allele determines a
normally functioning protein, while the recessive allele
does not specify a functional protein. You will see in
Chapter 3 that, although it is certainly not always the case,
the molecular explanation described here is the most
common reason why one allele is dominant to another
(recessive) allele. Genes likely to be those Mendel described for stem length and flower color have also been
identified recently. In both cases, the dominant allele encodes a normally functioning protein, and the recessive
allele specifies either no protein or a less functional version of the normal protein.
essential concepts
•	 Discrete units called genes control the appearance of
inherited traits; genes come in alternative forms called
alleles.
•	 A sexually reproducing organism’s body cells contain two
alleles for every gene. These alleles may be the same (in
a homozygote) or different (in a heterozygote).
•	 Genotype refers to the alleles an individual possesses;
phenotype refers to the traits the individual exhibits.
•	 The dominant allele controls the phenotype of a trait in
heterozygotes; the other allele in the heterozygote is
recessive. In monohybrid crosses, the dominant and
recessive phenotypes will appear in the progeny in a ratio
of 3:1.
•	 Alleles segregate during the formation of gametes, which
thus contain only one allele of each gene. Male and
female gametes unite at random at fertilization. These two
processes correspond to Mendel’s law of segregation.
•	 The segregation of alleles of any one gene is
independent of the segregation of the alleles of other
genes. This principle is Mendel’s law of independent
assortment. According to this law, crosses between Aa
Bb dihybrids will generate progeny with a phenotypic
ratio of 9 (A– B–) : 3 (A– bb) : 3 (aa B–) : 1 (aa bb).
•	 Most often, the dominant allele of a gene specifies a
functional product (a protein), while the recessive allele
determines either a less functional or nonfunctional
version of the protein, or no protein at all.
Figure 2.20 Molecular explanations of Mendel’s pea shape and pea color genes. The R allele of the pea shape gene
specifies the enzyme Sbe1, which converts unbranched starch (amylose) to branched starch (amylopectin). The r allele does not produce
Sbe1. The buildup of unbranched starch in rr peas ultimately causes seed wrinkling. The Y allele of the pea color gene specifies the enzyme
Sgr, which functions in a pathway to break down chlorophyll during pea maturation, resulting in yellow peas. The y allele does not produce
Sgr. Chlorophyll is not broken down in yy peas, and they remain green
Biochemical function of Mendel’s pea shape gene
R: Sbe1
r: no Sbe1
H
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
O H
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
CH2
O
RR, Rr
Sbe1
rr
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
OH
OH H
H H
H H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H
O
O
OH
OH H
CH2OH
H H
H H
O
O
Chlorophyll (green pigment) Breakdown product (colorless)
(b) Biochemical function of Mendel’s pea color gene
Y: Sgr
y: no Sgr
yy
YY, Yy
Sgr
HN
NH
Me
OMe
OH
N
N
O
O
O
HN
NH
Me O
O
Mendelian Inheritance
in Humans
learning objectives
1. Analyze human pedigrees to determine whether a
genetic disease exhibits recessive or dominant
inheritance.
2. Explain why Huntington disease is inherited as a
dominant allele while cystic fibrosis is caused by a
recessive allele.
Although many human traits clearly run in families, most
do not show a simple Mendelian pattern of inheritance.
Suppose, for example, that you have brown eyes, but both
your parents’ eyes appear to be blue. Because blue is normally considered recessive to brown, does this mean that
you are adopted or that your father isn’t really your father?
Not necessarily, because eye color is influenced by more
than one gene.
Like eye color, most common and obvious human phenotypes arise from the interaction of many genes. In contrast,
single-gene traits in people usually involve an abnormality
that is disabling or life-threatening. Examples are the progressive neurological damage of Huntington disease and the
clogged lungs and potential respiratory failure of cystic fibrosis. A defective allele of a single gene gives rise to Huntington disease; defective alleles of a different gene are
responsible for cystic fibrosis. Table 2.1 lists some of the
roughly 6000 such single-gene, or Mendelian, traits known
in humans as of 2016. As you will see, the allele that causes
Huntington disease is dominant and the normal (nondisease)
allele of this gene is recessive. The opposite is true for cystic
fibrosis—the disease-causing allele is recessive and the normal (nondisease) allele is dominant.
Pedigrees Aid the Study of Hereditary
Traits in Human Families
Determining a genetic defect’s pattern of transmission is
not always an easy task because people make slippery genetic subjects. Their generation time is long, and the families they produce are relatively small, which makes
statistical analysis difficult. Humans do not base their
choice of mates on purely genetic considerations. Thus, no
pure-breeding lines exist and no controlled matings are
possible. Furthermore, people rarely produce a true F2 generation (like the one in which Mendel observed the 3:1 ratios from which he derived his rules) because brothers and
sisters almost never mate.
Geneticists circumvent these difficulties by working
with a large number of families or with several generations of a very large family. In this way, scientists can study the
large numbers of genetically related individuals needed to
establish the inheritance patterns of specific traits. A family history, known as a pedigree, is an orderly diagram of a
family’s relevant genetic features, extending back to at least
both sets of grandparents and preferably through as many
additional generations as possible. From systematic pedigree analysis in the light of Mendel’s laws, geneticists
can tell if a trait is determined by alternative alleles of a
single gene and whether a single-gene trait is dominant
or recessive. Because Mendel’s principles are so simple
and straightforward, a little logic can go a long way in
explaining how traits are inherited in humans.
Figure 2.21 shows how to interpret a family pedigree
diagram. Squares ( ) represent males, circles ( ) are females, diamonds ( ) indicate that the sex is unspecified.
Family members affected by the trait in question are indicated by a filled-in symbol (for example, ). A single horizontal line connecting a male and a female ( )
represents a mating; a double connecting line ( ) designates a consanguineous mating, that is, a mating between relatives; and a horizontal line above a series of
symbols ( ) indicates the children of the same parents
(a sibship) arranged and numbered from left to right in order of their birth. Roman numerals to the left or right of the
diagram indicate the generations.
To reach a conclusion about the mode of inheritance of
a family trait, human geneticists must use a pedigree that
supplies sufficient information. For example, researchers
could not determine whether the allele causing the disease
depicted at the bottom of Fig. 2.21 is dominant or recessive solely on the basis of the simple pedigree shown. The data
are consistent with both possibilities. If the trait is dominant, then the father and the affected son are heterozygotes,
while the mother and the unaffected son are homozygotes
for the recessive normal allele. If instead the trait is recessive, the father and affected son are homozygotes for the
recessive disease-causing allele, while the mother and the
unaffected son are heterozygotes.
Several kinds of additional information could help resolve this uncertainty. Human geneticists would particularly
want to know the frequency at which the trait in question is
found in the population from which the family came. If the
trait is rare in the population, then the allele giving rise to
the trait should also be rare, and the most likely hypothesis  would require that the fewest genetically unrelated people
carry the allele. Only the father in Fig. 2.21 would need to
have a dominant disease-causing allele, but both parents
would need to carry a recessive disease-causing allele (the
father two copies and the mother one). However, even the
information that the trait is rare does not allow us to draw
the firm conclusion that it is inherited in a dominant fashion. The pedigree in the figure is so limited that we cannot
be sure the two parents are themselves unrelated. As we
discuss later in more detail, related parents might have both
received the same rare recessive allele from their common
ancestor. This example illustrates why human geneticists try
to collect family histories that cover several generations.
We now look at more extensive pedigrees for the dominant trait of Huntington disease and for the recessive condition of cystic fibrosis. The patterns by which these traits
appear in the pedigrees provide important clues that can
indicate modes of inheritance and allow geneticists to assign genotypes to family members.
 

TABLE 2.1 Some of the Most Common Single-Gene Traits in Humans
Disease Effect Incidence of Disease
Caused by a Recessive Allele
Thalassemia (chromosome 16 or 11) Reduced amounts of hemoglobin; 1/10 in parts of Italy
anemia, bone and spleen enlargement
Sickle-cell anemia (chromosome 11) Abnormal hemoglobin; sickle-shaped red 1/625 African-Americans
cells, anemia, blocked circulation;
increased resistance to malaria
Cystic fibrosis (chromosome 7) Defective cell membrane protein; 1/2000 Caucasians
excessive mucus production; digestive
and respiratory failure
Tay-Sachs disease (chromosome 15) Missing enzyme; buildup of fatty deposit 1/3000 Eastern European Jews
in brain that disrupts mental development
Phenylketonuria (PKU) (chromosome 12) Missing enzyme; mental deficiency 1/10,000 Caucasians
Caused by a Dominant Allele
Hypercholesterolemia (chromosome 19) Missing protein that removes cholesterol 1/122 French Canadians
from the blood; heart attack by age 50
Huntington disease (chromosome 4) Abnormal Huntingtin protein; progressive 1/25,000 Caucasians
mental and neurological damage;
neurologic disorders by ages 40–70
Figure 2.21 Symbols used in pedigree analysis. In the
simple pedigree at the bottom, I-1 is the father, I-2 is the mother,
and II-1 and II-2 are their sons. The father and the first son are both
affected by the disease trait.
Male
Female
Sex unspecified
Diseased
Multiple progeny
Deceased
Mating line
Line of descent
Sibship line
Individual number within generation
Consanguineous
mating
Unaected
5 3 14
1 2
1 2
Generation
Generation
A Vertical Pattern of Inheritance Indicates
a Rare Dominant Trait
Huntington disease is named for George Huntington, the
New York physician who first described its course. This
illness usually shows up in middle age and slowly destroys
its victims both mentally and physically. Symptoms include intellectual deterioration, severe depression, and
jerky, irregular movements, all caused by the progressive
death of nerve cells. If one parent develops the symptoms,
his or her children usually have a 50% probability of suffering from the disease, provided they live to adulthood. Because symptoms are not present at birth and manifest
themselves only later in life, Huntington disease is known
as a late-onset genetic trait.
How would you proceed in assigning genotypes to the
individuals in the Huntington disease pedigree depicted in
Fig. 2.22? First, you would need to find out if the diseaseproducing allele is dominant or recessive. Several clues
suggest that Huntington disease is transmitted by a dominant allele of a single gene. Everyone who develops the
disease has at least one parent who shows the trait, and in
several generations, approximately half of the offspring are
affected. The pattern of affected individuals is thus vertical:
If you trace back through the ancestors of any affected individual, you would see at least one affected person in each
generation, giving a continuous line of family members
with the disease. When a disease is rare in the population as
a whole, a vertical pattern is strong evidence that a dominant allele causes the trait; the alternative would require
that many unrelated people carry a rare recessive allele. (A
recessive trait that is extremely common might also show
up in every generation; we examine this possibility in Problem 40 at the end of this chapter.)
Figure 2.22 Huntington disease: A rare dominant trait.
All individuals represented by filled-in symbols are heterozygotes
(except I-1, who could instead have been homozygous for the
dominant HD disease allele); all individuals represented by open
symbols are homozygotes for the recessive HD+ normal allele.
Among the 14 children of the consanguineous mating, DNA testing
shows that some are HD HD, some are HD HD+, and some are HD+
HD+. The diamond designation masks personal details to protect
confidentiality.
In tracking a dominant allele through a pedigree, you
can view every mating between an affected and an unaffected partner as analogous to a testcross. If some of the
offspring do not have Huntington disease, you know the
parent showing the trait is a heterozygote. As an exercise,
you should check your own genotype assignments against
the answers in the caption to Fig. 2.22.
Notice also in the legend to Fig. 2.22 that human
geneticists use different symbols than Mendel’s for alleles
of genes. In human genotypes, all alleles are written in
uppercase. If the allele specifies a normally functioning
gene product, the allele symbol has a superscript +. Alleles
that specify no gene product or abnormal gene products
sometimes have no superscript at all, as in the Fig. 2.22
legend, but in other cases they have a superscript other than
+ that signifies a particular type of abnormal allele. (See
the Appendix Guidelines for Gene Nomenclature for
further discussion of genetic notation.)
Like Mendel’s pea genes, the gene that causes Huntington disease has been identified and studied at the
molecular level. In fact, in 1988 this was the first human disease gene identified molecularly using methods
that will be described in Chapter 11. The protein product of the Huntington disease gene, called Huntingtin or
Htt, is needed for the proper physiology of nerve cells,
but the protein’s precise role in these cells is not yet
understood. The dominant disease allele (HD) specifies
a defective Htt protein that over time damages nerve
cells (Fig. 2.23).
The disease allele is dominant to the normal allele because the presence of the normal Htt protein in heterozygotes does not prevent the abnormal protein from damaging
the cells. It is important to note that this explanation for the
Huntington disease allele is only one of many different molecular mechanisms that may result in a disease allele
that is dominant to the normal allele of a particular gene.
No effective treatment yet exists for Huntington disease, and because of its late onset, there was until the 1980s
no way for children of a Huntington parent to know before
middle age—usually until well after their own childbearing
years—whether they carried the Huntington disease allele
(HD). Most people with the disease allele are HD HD+
heterozygotes, so their children would have a 50% probability of inheriting HD and, before they are diagnosed, a
25% probability of passing the defective allele on to one of
their children.
In the mid-1980s, with new knowledge of the gene,
molecular geneticists developed a DNA test that determines whether an individual carries the HD allele. (This
test will be explained in detail in Chapter 11.) Because of
the lack of effective treatment for the disease, some young
adults whose parents died of Huntington disease prefer not
to be tested so that they will not learn their own fate prematurely. However, other at-risk individuals employ the test
for the HD allele to guide their decisions about having children. If someone whose parent had Huntington disease
does not have HD, he or she has no chance of developing
the disease or of transmitting it to offspring. If the test
shows the presence of HD, the at-risk person and his or her
partner might choose to conceive a child using in vitro fertilization (IVF) technology (described in Chapter 11) that
allows for genotyping of early-stage embryos. Using IVF,
only embryos lacking the HD disease allele would be introduced into the mother’s womb.
The Genetics and Society Box Developing Guidelines
for Genetic Screening discusses significant social and
ethical issues raised by information obtained from family
pedigrees and molecular tests.
Figure 2.23 Why the allele for Huntington disease is
dominant. People who are HD HD or HD HD+ exhibit Huntington
disease because the HD allele produces an abnormal Htt protein
that damages nerve cells. Homozygotes for the normal allele (HD+
HD+) produce only normal Htt protein and do not have the disease.
The disease allele (HD) is dominant because even when the normal
protein is present—in HD HD+ heterozygotes—the abnormal protein
damages nerve cells. HD HD homozygosity is possible because the
abnormal Htt protein retains some function of the normal protein
A Horizontal Pattern of Inheritance
Indicates a Rare Recessive Trait
Unlike Huntington disease, most confirmed single-gene
diseases in humans are caused by recessive alleles. One
reason is that, with the exception of late-onset traits, deleterious dominant alleles are unlikely to be transmitted to the
next generation. For example, if people affected with Huntington disease all died by the age of 10, the disease would
disappear from the population. In contrast, individuals can
carry one allele for a recessive disease without ever being
affected by any symptoms.
Figure 2.24 shows three pedigrees for cystic fibrosis,
the most commonly inherited recessive disease among
Caucasian children in the United States. A double dose of
the recessive CF allele (meaning the absence of a CF+
allele) causes a fatal disorder in which the lungs, pancreas,
and other organs become clogged with a thick, viscous
mucus that can interfere with breathing and digestion. One
in every 2000 white Americans is born with cystic fibrosis,
and only 10% of them survive into their 30s.
Note two salient features of the cystic fibrosis pedigrees.
First, the family pattern of people showing the trait is often
horizontal: The parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents
of children born with cystic fibrosis do not themselves
manifest the disease, while several brothers and sisters in a
single generation may. A horizontal pedigree pattern is a
strong indication that the trait is recessive. The unaffected
parents are heterozygous carriers: They bear a dominant normal allele (CF+) that masks the effects of the recessive
abnormal one. An estimated 12 million Americans are carriers of a recessive CF allele. Table 2.2 summarizes some of
the clues found in pedigrees that can help you decide whether
a trait is caused by a dominant or a recessive allele.
The second salient feature of the cystic fibrosis pedigrees is that many of the couples who produce afflicted
children are blood relatives; that is, their mating is consanguineous (as indicated by the double line). In Fig. 2.24a, the
consanguineous mating in generation V is between third
cousins. Of course, children with cystic fibrosis can also
have unrelated carrier parents, but because relatives share
genes, their offspring have a much greater than average
chance of receiving two copies of a rare allele. Whether or not they are related, carrier parents are both heterozygotes.
Thus among their offspring, the proportion of unaffected to
affected children is expected to be 3:1. To look at it another
way, the chances are that 1 out of 4 children of two heterozygous carriers will be homozygous cystic fibrosis sufferers.
You can gauge your understanding of this inheritance
pattern by assigning a genotype to each person in Fig. 2.24
and then checking your answers against the caption. Note
that for several individuals, such as the generation I individuals in part (a) of the figure, it is impossible to assign a
full genotype. We know that one of these people must be the carrier who supplied the original CF allele, but we do
not know if it was the male or the female. As with an ambiguous dominant phenotype in peas, the unknown second
allele is indicated by a dash (–).
In Fig. 2.24a, a mating between the unrelated carriers
VI-1 and VI-2 produced a child with cystic fibrosis. How
likely is such a marriage between unrelated carriers for a recessive genetic condition? The answer depends on the gene in
question and the particular population into which a person is
born. As Table 2.1 shows, the incidence of genetic diseases
(and thus the frequency of their carriers) varies markedly
among populations. Such variation reflects the distinct genetic
histories of different groups. The area of genetics that analyzes
differences among groups of individuals is called population
genetics, a subject we cover in detail in Chapter 21. Notice that
in Fig. 2.24a, several unrelated, unaffected people, such as II-1
and II-4, married into the family under consideration. Although it is highly probable that these individuals are homozygotes for the normal allele of the gene (CF+CF+), a small
chance (whose magnitude depends on the population) exists
that any one of them could be a carrier of the disease.
Genetic researchers identified the cystic fibrosis gene
in 1989, soon after the Huntington disease gene was identified. The normal, dominant CF+ allele makes a protein
called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). CFTR protein forms a channel in the cell
membranes that controls the flow of chloride ions through
lung cells. Recessive CF disease alleles either produce no
CFTR or produce nonfunctional or less functional versions
of the protein (Fig. 2.25). Because of osmosis, water flows
into lung cells without CFTR, while a thick, dehydrated mucus builds up outside the cells. Thus, CF CF homozygotes have no functional CFTR (or not enough of this protein) and exhibit cystic fibrosis. Gene therapy—insertion
of a normal CF+ gene into lung cells of patients—has been
tried to ameliorate the disease’s debilitating symptoms, but
so far without success.
Despite the failure to date of gene therapy, identification of the gene responsible for cystic fibrosis has very recently led to effective treatments for the disease
in patients with particular mutant alleles. For example,
in 2015 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a drug cocktail called Orkambi® that helps the
particular defective form of CFTR specified by one of
these alleles to function properly. Varied approaches to
the treatment of cystic fibrosis and other inherited diseases will be discussed later in the book.
Figure 2.24 Cystic fibrosis: A recessive condition. In (a),
the two affected individuals (VI-4 and VII-1) are CF CF; that is,
homozygotes for the recessive disease allele. Their unaffected
parents must be carriers, so V-1, V-2, VI-1, and VI-2 must all be CF
CF +. Individuals II-2, II-3, III-2, III-4, IV-2, and IV-4 are probably also
carriers. We cannot determine which of the founders (I-1 or I-2) was
a carrier, so we designate their genotypes as CF +–. Because the CF
allele is relatively rare, it is likely that II-1, II-4, III-1, III-3, IV-1, and
IV-3 are CF +CF + homozygotes. The genotype of the remaining
unaffected people (VI-3, VI-5, and VII-2) is uncertain (CF +–). (b and
c) These two families demonstrate horizontal patterns of inheritance.
Without further information, the unaffected children in each
pedigree must be regarded as having a CF +– genotype.
Developing Guidelines for Genetic Screening
	• Should I be screened if a test is available? For most inherited diseases, no cures presently exist. The psychological
burden of anticipating a fatal late-onset disease for which
there is no treatment could be devastating, and therefore
some people might decide not to be tested. Others may
object to testing for religious reasons, or because of
confidentiality concerns.
	• If a screening program is established, who should be
tested? The answer depends on what the test is trying to
accomplish as well as on its expense. Ultimately, the cost
of a procedure must be weighed against the usefulness
of the data it provides. In the United States, for example,
only one-tenth as many African-Americans as Caucasians
are affected by cystic fibrosis, and Asians almost never
exhibit the disease. Should all racial groups be tested for
cystic fibrosis, or only Caucasians?
	• Should private employers and insurance companies be
allowed to test their clients and employees? Some employers advocate genetic screening to reduce the incidence of occupational disease, arguing that they can use
genetic test results to make sure employees are not assigned to environments that might cause them harm.
Critics of this position say that screening violates workers’
rights, including the right to privacy, increases racial and
ethnic discrimination in the workplace, and provides insurers with an excuse to deny coverage. In 2008, President
George W. Bush signed into law the Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination Act, which prohibits insurance companies and employers in the United States from discriminating on the basis of information derived from genetic tests.
	• Finally, how should people be educated about the meaning of test results? In one small-community screening
program, people identified as carriers of the recessive, lifethreatening blood disorder known as β-thalassemia were
ostracized; as a result, carriers ended up marrying one
another, only making medical matters worse. By contrast,
in Ferrara, Italy, where 30 new cases of β-thalassemia had
been reported every year, extensive screening combined
with education was so successful that the 1980s passed
with only a few new cases of the disease.
Given all of these considerations, what kind of guidelines
would you like to see established to ensure that genetic screening reaches the right people at the right time, and that information gained from such screening is used for the right purposes?
In the early 1970s, the United States launched a national
screening program for carriers of sickle-cell anemia, a recessive
genetic disease that afflicts roughly 1 in 600 African-Americans.
The disease is caused by a particular allele, called HbβS, of the
β-globin gene; the dominant normal allele is HbβA. The protein
determined by the β-globin gene is one component of the
oxygen-carrying hemoglobin molecule. HbβS HbβS homozygotes have sickle-shaped red blood cells; these patients suffer
a decrease in oxygen supply, tire easily, and often develop heart
failure from stress on the circulatory system.
The national screening program for sickle-cell anemia was
based on a simple test of hemoglobin mobility: Normal and sickling hemoglobins move at different rates in a gel. People who
participated in the screening program and found they were carriers could use the test results to make informed reproductive decisions. A healthy man, for example, who learned he was a carrier
(that is, that he was a HbβS HbβA heterozygote) would not have to
worry about having an affected child if his mate was a noncarrier.
The original sickle-cell screening program, based on detection of the abnormal hemoglobin protein, was not an unqualified success, largely because of insufficient educational
follow-through. Many who learned they were carriers mistakenly thought they had the disease. Moreover, employers and
insurance companies that obtained access to the information
denied jobs or health insurance to some heterozygotes for no
acceptable reason. Problems of public relations and education
thus made a reliable screening test into a source of dissent and
alienation.
Today, at-risk families may be screened for a growing number of genetic disorders, thanks to the ability to evaluate genotypes directly. The need to establish guidelines for genetic
screening thus becomes more and more pressing. Several
related questions reveal the complexity of the issue.
	• Why carry out genetic screening at all? The first reason
for screening is to obtain information that will benefit individuals. For example, if you learn at an early age that you
have a genetic predisposition to heart disease, you can
change your lifestyle to improve your chances of staying
healthy. You can also use the results from genetic screening to make informed reproductive decisions.
	• The second reason for genetic screening, which often
conflicts with the first, is to benefit groups within society.
Insurance companies and employers, for example, would
like to know who is at risk for various genetic conditions.
TABLE 2.2 How to Recognize Dominant
and Recessive Traits in Pedigrees
Dominant Traits
1. Affected children always have at least one affected parent.
2. Dominant traits show a vertical pattern of inheritance: The
trait shows up in every generation.
3. Two affected parents can produce unaffected children, if both
parents are heterozygotes.
Recessive Traits
1. Affected individuals can be the children of two unaffected
carriers, particularly as a result of consanguineous matings.
2. All the children of two affected parents should be affected.
3. Rare recessive traits show a horizontal pattern of inheritance:
The trait first appears among several members of one
generation and is not seen in earlier generations.
4. Recessive traits may show a vertical pattern of inheritance if
the trait is extremely common in the population.
Figure 2.25 Why the allele for cystic fibrosis is recessive. The CFTR protein regulates the passage of chloride ions (green
spheres) through the cell membrane. People who are homozygous for a cystic fibrosis disease allele (CF CF) have the disease because
recessive disease alleles either specify no CFTR protein as shown, or encode abnormal CFTR proteins that do not function at all or do not
function as well as the normal protein (not shown). Disease alleles (CF) are recessive because CF CF+ heterozygotes produce CFTR from the
normal (CF+) allele, and this amount of CFTR is sufficient for normal lung function.
CF + CF + or CF CF + CF CF
Inside of the cell
Outside of the cell
mucus
Cystic fibrosis
Cl– ions
Inside of the cell
Outside of the cell
Normal
Lipid bilayer of
cell membrane
CFTR protein
In a vertical pattern of transmission, a trait that appears in
an affected individual also appears in at least one parent,
one of the affected parent’s parents, and so on. If a trait is
rare, a pedigree with a vertical pattern usually indicates
that the disease-causing allele is dominant.
•	 In a horizontal pattern of transmission, a trait that appears
in an affected individual may not appear in any ancestors,
but it may appear in some of the person’s siblings. A
pedigree with a horizontal pattern usually indicates a rare
recessive disease-causing allele. Affected individuals are
often products of consanguineous mating.
•	 Various kinds of biochemical events may explain
why some disease alleles are dominant. In the case
of Huntington disease, the disease-causing HD allele
specifies an abnormal, deleterious version of the
protein produced by the normal, recessive allele.
•	 Recessive disease alleles, like the CF alleles that
cause cystic fibrosis, usually specify either no protein
or less-functional versions of the protein that the
normal, dominant allele produces.
Mendel answered the three basic questions about heredity
as follows: To What is inherited? he replied, “alleles of
genes.” To How is it inherited? he responded, “according
to the principles of segregation and independent assortment.” And to What is the role of chance in heredity? he
said, “for each individual, inheritance is determined by
chance, but within a population, this chance operates in a
context of strictly defined probabilities.”
Within a decade of the 1900 rediscovery of Mendel’s
work, numerous breeding studies had shown that Mendel’s
laws hold true not only for seven pairs of antagonistic characteristics in peas, but also for many diverse traits in a wide
variety of sexually reproducing plant and animal species.
Some of these same breeding studies, however, raised a challenge to the new genetics. For certain traits in certain species,
the studies uncovered unanticipated phenotypic ratios, or the
results included F1 and F2 progeny with novel phenotypes
that resembled those of neither pure-breeding parent.
These phenomena could not be explained by Mendel’s
hypothesis that for each gene, two alternative alleles, one
completely dominant, the other recessive, determine a single trait. We now know that most common traits, including
skin color, eye color, and height in humans, are determined
by interactions between two or more genes. We also know
that within a given population, more than two alleles may
be present for some of those genes. Chapter 3 shows how
the genetic analysis of such complex traits, that is, traits
produced by complex interactions between genes and between genes and the environment, extended rather than
contradicted Mendel’s laws of inheritance.
Solving Genetics Problems
The best way to evaluate and increase your understanding
of the material in the chapter is to apply your knowledge in
solving genetics problems. Genetics word problems are like puzzles. Take them in slowly—don’t be overwhelmed
by the whole problem. Identify useful facts given in the
problem, and use the facts to deduce additional information. Use genetic principles and logic to work toward the solutions. The more problems you do, the easier they become. In solving problems, you will not only solidify your
understanding of genetic concepts, but you will also develop basic analytical skills that are applicable in many
disciplines.
Note that some of the problems at the end of each
chapter are designed to introduce supplementary but important concepts that expand on the information in the text.
You can nonetheless answer such problems using logical
inferences from your reading.
Solving genetics problems requires much more than
simply plugging numbers into formulas. Each problem is
unique and requires thoughtful evaluation of the information given and the question being asked. The following are
general guidelines you can follow in approaching these
word problems:
a. Read through the problem once to get some sense of
the concepts involved.
b. Go back through the problem, noting all the information supplied to you. For example, genotypes or phenotypes of offspring or parents may be given to you
or implied in the problem. Represent the known information in a symbolic format—assign symbols for alleles; use these symbols to indicate genotypes; make a
diagram of the crosses including genotypes and phenotypes given or implied. Be sure that you do not assign different letters of the alphabet to two alleles of
the same gene, as this can cause confusion. Also, be
careful to discriminate clearly between the upper- and
lowercases of letters, such as C(c) or S(s).
c. Now, reassess the question and work toward the solution using the information given. Make sure you
answer the question being asked!
d. When you finish the problem, check to see that the
answer makes sense. You can often check solutions
by working backwards; that is, see if you can reconstruct the data from your answer.
e. After you have completed a question and checked your
answer, spend a minute to think about which major
concepts were involved in the solution. This is a critical step for improving your understanding of genetics.
For each chapter, the logic involved in solving two or three
types of problems is described in detail.
I. In cats, white patches are caused by the dominant allele P, while pp individuals are solid-colored. Short
hair is caused by a dominant allele S, while ss cats
have long hair. A long-haired cat with patches
whose mother was solid-colored and short-haired
mates with a short-haired, solid-colored cat whose
mother was long-haired and solid-colored. What
kinds of kittens can arise from this mating, and in
what proportions?
Answer
The solution to this problem requires an understanding of
dominance/recessiveness, gamete formation, and the independent assortment of alleles of two genes in a cross.
First make a representation of the known information:
Mothers: solid, short-haired solid, long-haired
Cross: cat 1 cat 2
patches, long-haired × solid, short-haired
What genotypes can you assign? Any cat showing a recessive phenotype must be homozygous for the recessive allele. Therefore the long-haired cats are ss; solid cats are pp.
Cat 1 is long-haired, so it must be homozygous for the recessive allele (ss). This cat has the dominant phenotype of
patches and could be either PP or Pp, but because the
mother was pp and could only contribute a p allele in her
gametes, cat 1 must be Pp. Cat 1’s full genotype is Pp ss.
Similarly, cat 2 is solid-colored, so it must be homozygous
for the recessive allele (pp). Because this cat is shorthaired, it could have either the SS or Ss genotype. Its mother
was long-haired (ss) and could only contribute an s allele in
her gamete, so cat 2 must be heterozygous Ss. The full
genotype is pp Ss.
The cross is therefore between Pp ss (cat 1) and pp Ss
(cat 2). To determine the types of kittens, first establish the
types of gametes that can be produced by each cat and then
set up a Punnett square to determine the genotypes of the
offspring. Cat 1 (Pp ss) produces Ps and ps gametes in
equal proportions. Cat 2 (pp Ss) produces pS and ps gametes in equal proportions. Four types of kittens can result
from this mating with equal probability: Pp Ss (patches,
short-haired), Pp ss (patches, long-haired), pp Ss (solid,
short-haired), and pp ss (solid, long-haired).
The following table demonstrates that you could also work
through this problem using the product rule of probability
instead of a Punnett square. The principles are the same:
Gametes produced in equal amounts by either parent are
combined at random.
Cat 1 Cat 2
gamete gamete Progeny
1/2 P s × 1/2 p S 1/4 Pp Ss patches, short-haired
1/2 P s × 1/2 p s 1/4 Pp ss patches, long-haired
1/2 P s × 1/2 p S 1/4 pp Ss solid-colored, short-haired
1/2 P s × 1/2 p s 1/4 pp ss solid-colored, long-haired
In tomatoes, red fruit is dominant to yellow fruit,
and purple stems are dominant to green stems. The
progeny from one mating consisted of 305 red fruit,
purple stem plants; 328 red fruit, green stem plants;
110 yellow fruit, purple stem plants; and 97 yellow
fruit, green stem plants. What were the genotypes
of the parents in this cross?
Answer
This problem requires an understanding of independent assortment in a dihybrid cross as well as the ratios predicted
from monohybrid crosses.
Designate the alleles:
R = red, r = yellow
P = purple stems, p = green stems
In genetics problems, the ratios of offspring can indicate
the genotype of parents. You will usually need to total the
number of progeny and approximate the ratio of offspring
in each of the different classes. For this problem, in which
the inheritance of two traits is given, consider each trait
independently. For red fruit, there are 305 + 328 = 633
red-fruited plants out of a total of 840 plants. This value
(633/840) is close to 3/4. About 1/4 of the plants have yellow fruit (110 + 97 = 207/840). From Mendel’s work,
you know that a 3:1 phenotypic ratio results from crosses
between plants that are hybrid (heterozygous) for one
gene. Therefore, the genotype for fruit color of each parent must have been Rr.
For stem color, 305 + 110 or 415/840 plants had purple stems. About half had purple stems, and the other half
(328 + 97) had green stems. A 1:1 phenotypic ratio occurs
when a heterozygote is mated to a homozygous recessive
(as in a testcross). The parents’ genotypes must have been
Pp and pp for stem color.
The complete genotype of the parent plants in this
cross was Rr Pp × Rr pp.
III. Tay-Sachs is a recessive lethal disease in which there
is neurological deterioration early in life. This disease
is rare in the population overall but is found at relatively high frequency in Ashkenazi Jews from Eastern
Europe. A woman whose maternal uncle had the disease is trying to determine the probability that she
and her husband could have an affected child. Her father does not come from a high-risk population. Her
husband’s sister died of the disease at an early age.
a. Draw the pedigree of the individuals described.
Include the genotypes where possible.
b. Determine the probability that the couple’s first
child will be affected.
Answer
This problem requires an understanding of dominance/
recessiveness and probability. First diagram the pedigree,
and then assign as many genotypes as possible using the
following allele designations:
T = normal allele; t = Tay-Sachs allele
Aected
uncle
Aected
sister
TtTT
tt
tt
Tt Tt
Tt
I
II
III
1 1
2
2
2
?
3
3 4 5
1
The genotypes of the two affected individuals, the woman’s
uncle (II-1) and the husband’s sister (III-3), are tt. Because
the uncle was affected, both of his parents must have been
heterozygous.
Similarly, as the husband’s sister (III-3) is affected,
both of her parents (II-4 and II-5) must be heterozygotes. Finally, because individual II-3 is not from a
high-risk population, the most likely assumption is that
he is TT.
You next need to determine the chance that a child of
III-1 and III-2 (that is, individual IV-1) would have TaySachs (tt). For that to be possible, both III-1 and III-2 must
be Tt given that neither is tt. For III-1 to be Tt, II-2 must be
Tt. Calculating the chance that II-2 is Tt is a bit tricky. At
first, it appears that the chance is 1/2 that the daughter of
two heterozygous (Tt) parents would be Tt: the expected
progeny ratio is 1 TT : 2 Tt : 1 tt. However, in this case you
have additional information to consider: II-2 is unaffected
and thus the genotype tt is ruled out. That leaves 1 TT :
2 Tt, or a 2/3 chance that II-2 is Tt. If so, the chance that
II-2 would transmit the t allele to III-1 is 1/2. Thus, the
probability that III-1 is Tt is 2/3 × 1/2 = 1/3. This fact
implies that II-2 could be either TT (probability = 1/3) or
Tt (probability = 2/3). If II-2 is Tt, the chance that she
would transmit the t allele to III-1 is 1/2. Thus, the probability that III-1 is Tt is 2/3 × 1/2 = 1/3.
What is the chance that III-2 is Tt? Both of his parents
are heterozygous, and he is unaffected. Thus, using similar
logic, the likelihood that III-2 is Tt is 2/3.
The probability that both III-1 and III-2 are Tt is 1/3 ×
2/3 = 2/9. The chance that the child of two Tt parents would
be tt is 1/4. Thus, the overall likelihood that IV-1, the child
of III-1 and III-2, would have Tay-Sachs is 2/9 × 1/4 =
1/18
Vocabulary
1. For each of the terms in the left column, choose the
best matching phrase in the right column.
a. phenotype 1. having two identical alleles of a given gene
b. alleles 2. the allele expressed in the phenotype of
the heterozygote
c. independent 3. alternate forms of a gene
assortment
d. gametes 4. observable characteristic
e. gene 5. a cross between individuals both
heterozygous for two genes
f. segregation 6. alleles of one gene separate into gametes
randomly with respect to alleles of other
genes
g. heterozygote 7. reproductive cells containing only one
copy of each gene
h. dominant 8. the allele that does not contribute to the
phenotype of the heterozygote
i. F1 9. the cross of an individual of ambiguous
genotype with a homozygous recessive
individual
j. testcross 10. an individual with two different alleles
of a gene
k. genotype 11. the heritable entity that determines a
characteristic
l. recessive 12. the alleles an individual has
m. dihybrid cross 13. the separation of the two alleles of a
gene into different gametes
n. homozygote 14. offspring of the P generation
Section 2.1
2. During the millennia in which selective breeding was
practiced, why did breeders fail to uncover the principle that traits are governed by discrete units of inheritance (that is, by genes)?
3. Describe the characteristics of the garden pea that
made it a good organism for Mendel’s analysis of the
basic principles of inheritance. Evaluate how easy or
difficult it would be to make a similar study of inheritance in humans by considering the same attributes
you described for the pea.
Section 2.2
4. An albino corn snake is crossed with a normal-colored
corn snake. The offspring are all normal-colored.
When these first-generation progeny snakes are
crossed among themselves, they produce 32 normalcolored snakes and 10 albino snakes.
a. How do you know that only a single gene is responsible for the color differences between these snakes?
b. Which of these phenotypes is controlled by the
dominant allele?
c. A normal-colored female snake is involved in a
testcross. This cross produces 10 normal-colored
and 11 albino offspring. What are the genotypes of
the parents and the offspring?
5. Two short-haired cats mate and produce six shorthaired and two long-haired kittens. What does this information suggest about how hair length is inherited?
6. Piebald spotting is a condition found in humans in
which there are patches of skin that lack pigmentation. The condition results from the inability of
pigment-producing cells to migrate properly during
development. Two adults with piebald spotting have
one child who has this trait and a second child with
normal skin pigmentation.
a. Is the piebald spotting trait dominant or recessive?
What information led you to this answer?
b. What are the genotypes of the parents?
7. As a Drosophila research geneticist, you keep stocks
of flies of specific genotypes. You have a fly that has
normal wings (dominant phenotype). Flies with short
wings are homozygous for a recessive allele of the
wing-length gene. You need to know if this fly with
normal wings is pure-breeding or heterozygous for
the wing-length trait. What cross would you do to
determine the genotype, and what results would you
expect for each possible genotype?
8. A mutant cucumber plant has flowers that fail to open
when mature. Crosses can be done with this plant by
manually opening and pollinating the flowers with
pollen from another plant. When closed × open
crosses were done, all the F1 progeny were open. The
F2 plants were 145 open and 59 closed. A cross of
closed × F1 gave 81 open and 77 closed. How is the
closed trait inherited? What evidence led you to your
conclusion?
9. In a particular population of mice, certain individuals
display a phenotype called short tail, which is inherited as a dominant trait. Some individuals display a
recessive trait called dilute, which affects coat color.
Which of these traits would be easier to eliminate
from the population by selective breeding? Why?
10. In humans, a dimple in the chin is a dominant characteristic controlled by a single gene.
a. A man who does not have a chin dimple has
children with a woman with a chin dimple whose
mother lacked the dimple. What proportion of their
children would be expected to have a chin dimple?
b. A man with a chin dimple and a woman who lacks
the dimple produce a child who lacks a dimple.
What is the man’s genotype?
c. A man with a chin dimple and a nondimpled
woman produce eight children, all having the chin
dimple. Can you be certain of the man’s genotype?
Why or why not? What genotype is more likely,
and why?
11. Some inbred strains of the weedy plant Arabidopsis
thaliana flower early in the growing season, but other
strains flower at later times. Four different Arabdiposis
plants (1–4) were crossed, and the resulting progeny
were tabulated as follows:
Mating Progeny
1 × 2 77 late : 81 early
1 × 3 134 late
1 × 4 93 late : 32 early
2 × 3 111 late
2 × 4 65 late : 61 early
3 × 4 126 late
Explain the genetic basis for the difference in flowering time. How do you know that among this
group of plants, the flowering time trait is influenced by the action of a single gene? Which allele
is dominant and which recessive?
b. Ascribe genotypes to the four plants.
c. What kinds of progeny would you expect if you allowed plants 1–4 to self-fertilize, and in what ratios?
12. Among Native Americans, two types of earwax (cerumen) are seen, dry and sticky. A geneticist studied the
inheritance of this trait by observing the types of offspring produced by different kinds of matings. He
observed the following numbers:
Offspring
Parents Number of mating pairs Sticky Dry
Sticky × sticky 10 32 6
Sticky × dry 8 21 9
Dry × dry 12 0 42
a. How is earwax type inherited?
b. Why are no 3:1 or 1:1 ratios present in the data
shown in the chart?
13. Imagine you have just purchased a black stallion of
unknown genotype. You mate him to a red mare, and
she delivers twin foals, one red and one black. Can
you tell from these results how color is inherited, assuming that alternative alleles of a single gene are involved? What crosses could you do to determine how
color is inherited
If you roll a die (singular of dice), what is the probability you will roll: (a) a 6? (b) an even number?
(c) a number divisible by 3? (d) If you roll a pair of
dice, what is the probability that you will roll two
6s? (e) an even number on one and an odd number
on the other? (f) matching numbers? (g) two numbers both over 4?
15. In a standard deck of playing cards, four suits exist
(red suits = hearts and diamonds, black suits =
spades and clubs). Each suit has 13 cards: Ace (A),
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and the face cards Jack (J),
Queen (Q), and King (K). In a single draw, what is
the probability that you will draw a face card? A red
card? A red face card?
16. How many genetically different eggs could be formed
by women with the following genotypes?
a. Aa bb CC DD
b. AA Bb Cc dd
c. Aa Bb cc Dd
d. Aa Bb Cc Dd
17. What is the probability of producing a child that will
phenotypically resemble either one of the two parents
in the following four crosses? How many phenotypically different kinds of progeny could potentially
result from each of the four crosses?
a. Aa Bb Cc Dd × aa bb cc dd
b. aa bb cc dd × AA BB CC DD
c. Aa Bb Cc Dd × Aa Bb Cc Dd
d. aa bb cc dd × aa bb cc dd
18. A mouse sperm of genotype a B C D E fertilizes an
egg of genotype a b c D e. What are all the possibilities for the genotypes of (a) the zygote and (b) a
sperm or egg produced by the mouse that develops
from this fertilization?
19. Your friend is pregnant with triplets. She thinks that it
is equally likely that she will be the mother of 3 sons,
3 daughters, 2 sons and 1 daughter, or 1 son and 2
daughters. Is she correct? Explain. (Assume that each
of the triplets is from a separate fertilization, and that
boys and girls are equally likely.)
20. Galactosemia is a recessive human disease that is
treatable by restricting lactose and glucose in the diet.
Susan Smithers and her husband are both heterozygous for the galactosemia gene.
a. Susan is pregnant with twins. If she has
fraternal (nonidentical) twins, what is the
probability both of the twins will be girls who
have galactosemia?
b. If the twins are identical, what is the probability
that both will be girls and have galactosemia?
For parts (c–g), assume that none of the children is
a twin.
c. If Susan and her husband have four children, what
is the probability that none of the four will have
galactosemia?
d. If the couple has four children, what is the probability that at least one child will have galactosemia?
e. If the couple has four children, what is the probability that the first two will have galactosemia and
the second two will not?
f. If the couple has three children, what is the probability that two of the children will have galactosemia and one will not, regardless of order?
g. If the couple has four children with galactosemia,
what is the probability that their next child will
have galactosemia?
21. Albinism is a condition in which pigmentation is
lacking. In humans, the result is white hair, nonpigmented skin, and pink eyes. The trait in humans is
caused by a recessive allele. Two normal parents
have an albino child. What are the parents’ genotypes?
What is the probability that the next child will be
albino?
22. A cross between two pea plants, both of which grew
from yellow round seeds, gave the following numbers
of seeds: 156 yellow round and 54 yellow wrinkled.
What are the genotypes of the parent plants? (Yellow
and round are dominant traits.)
23. A third-grader decided to breed guinea pigs for her
school science project. She went to a pet store and
bought a male with smooth black fur and a female
with rough white fur. She wanted to study the inheritance of those features and was sorry to see that the
first litter of eight contained only rough black animals. To her disappointment, the second litter from
those same parents contained seven rough black animals. Soon the first litter had begun to produce F2 offspring, and they showed a variety of coat types.
Before long, the child had 125 F2 guinea pigs. Eight
of them had smooth white coats, 25 had smooth black
coats, 23 were rough and white, and 69 were rough
and black.
a. How are the coat color and texture characteristics
inherited? What evidence supports your
conclusions?
b. What phenotypes and proportions of offspring
should the girl expect if she mates one of the
smooth white F2 females to an F1 male?
24. The self-fertilization of an F1 pea plant produced from
a parent plant homozygous for yellow and wrinkled
seeds and a parent homozygous for green and round
seeds resulted in a pod containing seven F2 peas.
(Yellow and round are dominant.) What is the probability that all seven peas in the pod are yellow and round?
25. The achoo syndrome (sneezing in response to bright
light) and trembling chin (triggered by anxiety) are
both dominant traits in humans.
a. What is the probability that the first child of parents
who are heterozygous for both the achoo gene and
trembling chin will have achoo syndrome but lack
the trembling chin?
b. What is the probability that the first child will have
neither achoo syndrome nor trembling chin?
26. A pea plant from a pure-breeding strain that is tall,
has green pods, and has purple flowers that are terminal is crossed to a plant from a pure-breeding strain
that is dwarf, has yellow pods, and has white flowers
that are axial. The F1 plants are all tall and have purple axial flowers as well as green pods.
a. What phenotypes do you expect to see in the F2?
b. What phenotypes and ratios would you predict in
the progeny from crossing an F1 plant to the dwarf
parent?
27. The following table shows the results of different
matings between jimsonweed plants that had either
purple or white flowers and spiny or smooth pods.
Determine the dominant allele for the two traits and
indicate the genotypes of the parents for each of the
crosses.
Parents Offspring
Purple White Purple White
Spiny Spiny Smooth Smooth
a. purple spiny × purple spiny 94 32 28 11
b. purple spiny × purple smooth 40 0 38 0
c. purple spiny × white spiny 34 30 0 0
d. purple spiny × white spiny 89 92 31 27
e. purple smooth × purple smooth 0 0 36 11
f. white spiny × white spiny 0 45 0 16
28. A pea plant heterozygous for plant height, pod
shape, and flower color was selfed. The progeny
consisted of 272 tall, inflated pods, purple flowers;
92 tall, inflated, white flowers; 88 tall, flat pods,
purple; 93 dwarf, inflated, purple; 35 tall, flat, white;
31 dwarf, inflated, white; 29 dwarf, flat, purple;
11 dwarf, flat, white. Which alleles are dominant
in this cross?
29. In the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the following genes and mutations are known:
Wing size: recessive allele for tiny wings t; dominant
allele for normal wings T.
Eye shape: recessive allele for narrow eyes n;
dominant allele for normal (oval) eyes N.
For each of the four following crosses, give the
genotypes of each of the parents.
Male Female
Wings Eyes Wings Eyes Offspring
1 tiny oval × tiny oval 78 tiny wings, oval eyes
24 tiny wings, narrow eyes
2 normal narrow × tiny oval 45 normal wings, oval eyes
40 normal wings, narrow eyes
38 tiny wings, oval eyes
44 tiny wings, narrow eyes
3 normal narrow × normal oval 35 normal wings, oval eyes
29 normal wings, narrow eyes
10 tiny wings, oval eyes
11 tiny wings, narrow eyes
4 normal narrow × normal oval 62 normal wings, oval eyes
19 tiny wings, oval eyes
30. Based on the information you discovered in the previous problem, answer the following:
a. A female fruit fly with genotype Tt nn is mated to
a male of genotype Tt Nn. What is the probability
that any one of their offspring will have normal
phenotypes for both characters?
b. What phenotypes would you expect among the offspring of this cross? If you obtained 200 progeny, how
many of each phenotypic class would you expect?
31. Considering the yellow and green pea color phenotypes studied by Gregor Mendel:
a. What is the biochemical function of the protein
that is specified by the gene responsible for the
pea color phenotype?
b. A null allele of a gene is an allele that does not
specify any of the biochemical function that the
gene normally provides. Of the two alleles Y and y,
which is more likely to be a null allele?
c. In terms of the underlying biochemistry, why is the
Y allele dominant to the y allele?
d. Why are peas that are yy homozygotes green?
e. The amount of the protein specified by a gene is
roughly proportional to the number of functional
copies of the gene carried by a cell or individual.
What do the phenotypes of YY homozygotes, Yy
heterozygotes, and yy homozygotes tell us about
the amount of the Sgr enzyme (the product of the
pea color gene) needed to produce a yellow color?
The Sgr enzyme is not needed for the survival of a
pea plant, but the genomes of organisms contain
many so-called essential genes needed for an individual’s survival. For such genes, heterozygotes for
the normal allele and the null allele survive, but individuals homozygous for the null allele die soon
after the male and female gametes, each with a null
allele, come together at fertilization. In light of
your answer to part (e), what does this fact tell you
about the advantage to an organism of having two
copies of their genes?
g. Do you think that a single pea pod could contain
peas with different phenotypes? Explain.
h. Do you think that a pea pod could be of one color
(say, green) while the peas within the pod could be
of a different color (say, yellow)? Explain.
32. What would have been the outcome (the genotypic
and phenotypic ratios) in the F2 of Mendel’s dihybrid
cross shown in Fig. 2.15 if the alleles of the pea color
gene (Y, y) and the pea shape gene (R, r) did not assort independently and instead the alleles inherited
from a parent always stayed together as a unit?
33. Recall that Mendel obtained pure-breeding plants with
either long or short stems and that hybrids had long
stems (Fig. 2.8). Monohybrid crosses produced an F2
generation with a 3:1 ratio of long stems to short stems,
indicating that this difference in stem length is governed by a single gene. The gene that likely controlled
this trait in Mendel’s plants has been discovered, and it
specifies an enzyme called G3βH, which catalyzes the
reaction shown in the accompanying figure. The product of the reaction, gibberellin, is a growth hormone
that makes plants grow tall. What is the most likely hypothesis to explain the difference between the dominant allele (L) and the recessive allele (l)?
G3βH
Precursor Gibberellin
CO2H
O H
CO
H
CO2H
O H
H
HO
34. The gene that likely controlled flower color (purple
or white) in Mendel’s pea plants has also been
identified. The flower color gene specifies a protein called bHLH required by cells to make three different enzymes (DFR, ANS, and 3GT) that function in
the pathway shown in the accompanying figure,
leading to synthesis of the purple pigment
anthocyanin.
a. What is the most likely explanation for the difference
between the dominant allele (P) and the recessive
allele (p) of the gene responsible for these flower
colors?
b. Given the biochemical pathway shown, could a
different gene have been the one governing Mendel’s
flower colors?
For each of the following human pedigrees, indicate whether the inheritance pattern is recessive
or dominant. What feature(s) of the pedigree did
you use to determine the mode of inheritance? Give
the genotypes of affected individuals and of individuals who carry the disease allele but are not
affected
Consider the pedigree that follows for cutis laxa, a
connective tissue disorder in which the skin hangs in
loose folds.
a. Assuming that the trait is rare, what is the apparent
mode of inheritance?
b. What is the probability that individual II-2 is a
carrier?
c. What is the probability that individual II-3 is a
carrier?
What is the probability that individual III-1 is
affected by the disease?
?
1 2
1 2
3 4
3 4
I
II
III
37. A young couple went to see a genetic counselor because each had a sibling with cystic fibrosis. (Cystic
fibrosis is a recessive disease, and neither member of
the couple nor any of their four parents is affected.)
a. What is the probability that the female of this
couple is a carrier?
b. What are the chances that their child will have
cystic fibrosis?
c. What is the probability that their child will be a
carrier of the cystic fibrosis disease allele?
38. Huntington disease is a rare fatal, degenerative neurological disease in which individuals start to show
symptoms in their 40s. It is caused by a dominant allele. Joe, a man in his 20s, just learned that his father
has Huntington disease.
a. What is the probability that Joe will also develop
the disease?
b. Joe and his new wife have been eager to start a
family. What is the probability that their first child
will eventually develop the disease?
39. Is the disease shown in the following pedigree caused
by a dominant or a recessive allele? Why? Based on
this limited pedigree, do you think the disease allele
is rare or common in the population? Why?

40. Figure 2.22 shows the inheritance of Huntington
disease in a family from a small village near Lake
Maracaibo in Venezuela. The village was founded by
a small number of immigrants, and generations of
their descendants have remained concentrated in this
isolated location. The allele for Huntington disease
has remained unusually prevalent there.
a. Why could you not conclude definitively that the
disease is the result of a dominant or a recessive
allele solely by looking at this pedigree?
b. Is there any information you could glean from the
family’s history that might imply the disease is due
to a dominant rather than a recessive allele?
Consider the cystic fibrosis pedigree in Figure 2.24a.
a. Assuming that one of the individuals in generation
I was a carrier, and that no one from outside the
family was a carrier, what was the probability that
any single child of the consanguineous couple in
generation V would have cystic fibrosis? (Assume
that none of their children is born yet, so you don’t
know that VI-4 has the disease.)
b. Assuming that one of the individuals in generation
I was a carrier and that 1/1000 people in the population is a carrier, and knowing that VI-4 has
the disease, how likely was it that VII-1 would
be affected?
42. The common grandfather of two first cousins has hereditary hemochromatosis, a recessive condition causing an abnormal buildup of iron in the body. Neither of
the cousins has the disease nor do any of their relatives.
a. If the first cousins had a child, what is the chance
that the child would have hemochromatosis?
Assume that the unrelated, unaffected parents of
the cousins are not carriers.
b. How would your calculation change if you knew
that 1 out of every 10 unaffected people in the population (including the unrelated parents of these
cousins) was a carrier for hemochromatosis?
43. People with nail-patella syndrome have poorly developed or absent kneecaps and nails. Individuals with
alkaptonuria have arthritis as well as urine that darkens when exposed to air. Both nail-patella syndrome
and alkaptonuria are rare phenotypes. In the following
pedigree, vertical red lines indicate individuals with
nail-patella syndrome, while horizontal green lines
denote individuals with alkaptonuria.
a. What are the most likely modes of inheritance of
nail-patella syndrome and alkaptonuria? What genotypes can you ascribe to each of the individuals in
the pedigree for both of these phenotypes?
b. In a mating between IV-2 and IV-5, what is the
chance that the child produced would have both
nail-patella syndrome and alkaptonuria? Nailpatella syndrome alone? Alkaptonuria alone?
Neither defect?
Midphalangeal hair (hair on top of the middle
segment of the fingers) is a common phenotype
caused by a dominant allele M. Homozygotes for
the recessive allele (mm) lack hair on the middle
segment of their fingers. Among 1000 families in
which both parents had midphalangeal hair, 1853
children showed the trait while 209 children did not.
Explain this result.
45. A man with Huntington disease (he is heterozygous
HD HD+) and a normal woman have two children.
a. What is the probability that only the second child
has the disease?
b. What is the probability that only one of the children
has the disease?
c. What is the probability that none of the children
has the disease?
d. Answer (a) through (c) assuming that the couple
had 10 children.
e. What is the probability that 4 of the 10 children in
the family in (d) have the disease?
46. Explain why disease alleles for cystic fibrosis (CF)
are recessive to the normal alleles (CF+), yet the
disease alleles responsible for Huntington disease
(HD) are dominant to the normal alleles (HD+).
47. The following pedigree shows the inheritance of red
hair in a family in Scotland. Red hair is caused by
homozygosity for a recessive allele of a gene called
MC1R. Although worldwide red hair is the rarest
of human hair colors, red hair is not uncommon in
Scotland. In fact, 40% of Scots without red hair are
nonetheless carriers of the red hair allele.
Why does red hair show a horizontal inheritance
pattern in this particular pedigree even though the
trait is caused by a recessive allele?
b. Assuming that individual III-2 has a child with the
Scottish woman shown (III-1) who is not a close
relative, what is the probability that this child
(IV-1) will have red hair?
c. What is the probability that the child of first cousins and will have red hair?
The Chromosome
Theory of Inheritance
Each of these three human chromosomes carries hundreds of genes.
© Adrian T. Sumner
Chromosomes: The Carriers of Genes
•   4.2 Sex Chromosomes and Sex Determination
•   4.3 Mitosis: Cell Division That Preserves Chromosome
Number
•   4.4 Meiosis: Cell Divisions That Halve Chromosome
Number
•   4.5 Gametogenesis
•   4.6 Validation of the Chromosome Theory
•   4.7 Sex-Linked and Sexually Dimorphic Traits
in Humans
IN THE SPHERICAL, membrane-bound nuclei of plant and
animal cells prepared for viewing under the microscope,
chromosomes appear as brightly colored, threadlike bodies. The nuclei of normal human cells carry 23 pairs of
chromosomes for a total of 46. Noticeable differences in
size and shape exist among the 23 pairs, but within each
pair, the two chromosomes appear to match exactly. (The
only exceptions are the male’s sex chromosomes, designated X and Y, which constitute an unmatched pair.)
Down syndrome was the first human genetic disorder
attributable not to a gene mutation but to an abnormal number
of chromosomes. Children born with Down syndrome have
47 chromosomes in each somatic cell nucleus because they
carry three, instead of the normal pair, of a very small chromosome referred to as number 21. The aberrant genotype, called trisomy 21, gives rise to
an abnormal phenotype, including a wide skull that is flatter than normal at the back, an
unusually large tongue, learning disabilities caused by the abnormal development of the
hippocampus and other parts of the brain, and a propensity to respiratory infections as well
as heart disorders, rapid aging, and leukemia (Fig. 4.1).
How can one extra copy of a chromosome that is itself of normal size and shape
cause such wide-ranging phenotypic effects? The answer has two parts. First and foremost, chromosomes are the cellular structures responsible for transmitting genetic information. In this chapter, we describe how geneticists concluded that chromosomes
are the carriers of genes, an idea that became known as the chromosome theory of
inheritance. The second part of the answer is that proper development depends not
just on what type of genetic material is present, but also on how much of it there is.
Thus the mechanisms governing gene transmission during cell division must vigilantly
maintain each cell’s chromosome number.
Cell division proceeds through the precise chromosome-parceling mechanisms of
mitosis (for somatic, or body cells) and meiosis (for gametes—eggs and sperm). When
the machinery does not function properly, errors in chromosome
distribution can have dire repercussions on the individual’s health
and survival. Down syndrome, for example, is the result of a failure
of chromosome segregation during meiosis. The meiotic error gives
rise to an egg or sperm carrying an extra chromosome 21 which, if
incorporated in the zygote at fertilization, is passed on via mitosis to
every cell of the developing embryo. Trisomy—three copies of a
chromosome instead of two—can occur with other chromosomes as
well, but in nearly all of these cases, the condition is prenatally
lethal and results in a miscarriage.
Two themes emerge in our discussion of meiosis and mitosis.
First, direct microscopic observations of chromosomes during gamete formation led early twentieth-century investigators to recognize
that chromosome movements parallel the behavior of Mendel’s
genes, so chromosomes are likely to carry the genetic material. This
chromosome theory of inheritance was proposed in 1902 and was
confirmed in the following 15 years through elegant experiments
performed mainly using the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster.
Second, the chromosome theory transformed the concept of a gene
from an abstract particle to a physical reality—part of a chromosome that could be seen and manipulated.
Figure 4.1 Down syndrome: One extra chromosome 
21 has widespread phenotypic consequences.
Trisomy 21 usually causes changes in physical appearance as
well as in the potential for learning. Many children with Down
syndrome, such as the fifth grader at the center of the
photograph, can participate fully in regular activities.
© Richard Hutchings
Chromosomes:
The Carriers of Genes
learning objectives
1. Differentiate among somatic cells, gametes, and
zygotes with regard to the number and origin of their
chromosomes.
2. Distinguish between homologous and nonhomologous
chromosomes.
3. List the differences between sister chromatids and
nonsister chromatids.
One of the first questions asked at the birth of an infant—
is it a boy or a girl?—acknowledges that male and female
normally are mutually exclusive characteristics like the
yellow versus green of Mendel’s peas. What’s more,
among humans and most other sexually reproducing species, a roughly 1:1 ratio exists between the two sexes.
Both males and females produce cells specialized for
reproduction—sperm or eggs—that serve as a physical
link to the next generation. In bridging the gap between
generations, these gametes must each contribute half of
the genetic material for making a normal, healthy son or
daughter. Whatever part of the gamete carries this material, its structure and function must be able to account for
the either-or aspect of sex determination as well as the generally observed 1:1 ratio of males to females. These
two features of sex determination were among the earliest
clues to the cellular basis of heredity.
Genes Reside in the Nucleus
The nature of the specific link between sex and reproduction remained a mystery until Anton van Leeuwenhoek, one of the earliest and most astute of microscopists,
discovered in 1667 that semen contains spermatozoa
(literally sperm animals). He imagined that these microscopic creatures might enter the egg and somehow
achieve fertilization, but it was not possible to confirm
this hypothesis for another 200 years.
Then, during a 20-year period starting in 1854
(about the same time Gregor Mendel was beginning his
pea experiments), microscopists studying fertilization in
frogs and sea urchins observed the union of male and
female gametes and recorded the details of the process
in a series of drawings. These drawings, as well as later
micrographs (photographs taken through a microscope),
clearly show that egg and sperm nuclei are the only elements contributed equally by maternal and paternal
gametes. This observation implies that something in the
nucleus contains the hereditary material. In humans, the
nuclei of the gametes are less than 2 millionths of a meter
in diameter. It is indeed remarkable that the genetic
link between generations is packaged within such an
exceedingly small space.
Genes Reside in Chromosomes
Further investigations, some dependent on technical innovations in microscopy, suggested that yet smaller, discrete
structures within the nucleus are the repository of genetic
information. In the 1880s, for example, a newly discovered
combination of organic and inorganic dyes revealed the
existence of the long, brightly staining, threadlike bodies
within the nucleus that we call chromosomes (literally colored bodies). It was now possible to follow the movement
of chromosomes during different kinds of cell division.
In embryonic cells, the chromosomal threads split
lengthwise in two just before cell division, and each of the
two newly forming daughter cells receives one-half of
every split thread. The kind of nuclear division followed by
cell division that results in two daughter cells containing
the same number and type of chromosomes as the original
parent cell is called mitosis (from the Greek mitos meaning
thread and -osis meaning formation or increase).
In the cells that give rise to male and female gametes,
the chromosomes composing each pair become segregated,
so that the resulting gametes receive only one chromosome
from each chromosome pair. The kind of nuclear division
that generates egg or sperm cells containing half the number
of chromosomes found in other cells within the same organism is called meiosis (from the Greek word for diminution).
Fertilization: The union of haploid gametes  
to produce diploid zygotes
In the first decade of the twentieth century, cytologists—
scientists who use the microscope to study cell structure—
showed that the chromosomes in a fertilized egg actually
consist of two matching sets, one contributed by the maternal gamete, the other by the paternal gamete. The corresponding maternal and paternal chromosomes appear alike
in size and shape, forming pairs (with one exception—the
sex chromosomes—which we discuss in a later section).
Gametes and other cells that carry only a single set of
chromosomes are called haploid (from the Greek word for
single). Zygotes and other cells carrying two matching sets
are diploid (from the Greek word for double). The number of
chromosomes in a normal haploid cell is designated by the
shorthand symbol n. The number of chromosomes in a normal diploid cell is then 2n. Figure 4.2 shows diploid cells as
well as the haploid gametes that arise from them in Drosophila, where 2n = 8 and n = 4. In humans, 2n = 46; n = 23.
You can see how the halving of chromosome number
during meiosis and gamete formation, followed by the union of two gametes’ chromosomes at fertilization, normally
allows a constant 2n number of chromosomes to be maintained from generation to generation in all individuals of a
species. The chromosomes of every pair must segregate
from each other during meiosis so that the haploid gametes
will each have one complete set of chromosomes. After fertilization forms the zygote, the process of mitosis then
ensures that all the somatic cells of the developing individual have identical diploid chromosome sets.
Species variations in the number  
and shape of chromosomes
Scientists analyze the chromosomal makeup of a cell when
the chromosomes are most visible—at a specific moment
in the cell cycle of growth and division, just before the
nucleus divides. At this point, known as metaphase
(described in detail later), individual chromosomes have
duplicated and condensed from thin threads into compact
rodlike structures. Each chromosome now consists of two
identical halves known as sister chromatids (Fig. 4.3).
The specific location at which sister chromatids are
attached to each other is called the centromere. Each sister
chromatid has its own centromere (Fig. 4.3), but in the duplicated chromosome, the two sister centromeres are pulled
together so tightly that they form a constriction within
which they cannot be resolved from each other, even in
images obtained in the scanning electron microscope (see
the picture at the beginning of the chapter).
Diploid versus haploid: 2n versus n. Fruit fly
somatic cells are diploid: They carry a maternal and paternal copy
of each chromosome. Meiosis generates haploid gametes with
only one copy of each chromosome. In Drosophila, diploid cells
have eight chromosomes (2n = 8), while gametes have four
chromosomes (n = 4). Note that the chromosomes in this diagram
are pictured before their replication. The X and Y chromosomes
determine the sex of the individual.
Drosophila melanogaster
Figure 4.3 Metaphase chromosomes can be classified 
by centromere position. Before cell division, each chromosome
replicates into two sister chromatids connected at their centromeres.
In highly condensed metaphase chromosomes, the centromeres can
appear near the middle (a metacentric chromosome), very near an
end (an acrocentric chromosome), or anywhere in between. In a
diploid cell, one homologous chromosome in each pair is from the
mother and the other from the father.
Figure 4.4 Karyotype of a human male. Photos of metaphase
human chromosomes are paired and arranged in order of decreasing
size. In a normal human male karyotype, 22 pairs of autosomes are
present, as well as an X and a Y (2n = 46). Homologous chromosomes
share the same characteristic pattern of dark and light bands
Pair of Homologous
Metacentric Chromosomes
Centromere Centromere
Sister
chromatids
Homologous chromosomes Homologous chromosomes
Pair of Homologous
Acrocentric Chromosomes
Nonsister
chromatids
Nonhomologous chromosomes
Geneticists often describe chromosomes according to
the location of the centromere (Fig. 4.3). In metacentric
chromosomes, the centromere is more or less in the middle;
in acrocentric chromosomes, the centromere is very close
to one end. Chromosomes thus always have two arms separated by a centromere, but the relative sizes of the two
arms can vary in different chromosomes.
Cells in metaphase can be fixed and stained with one
of several dyes that highlight the chromosomes and accentuate the centromeres. The dyes also produce characteristic
banding patterns made up of lighter and darker regions.
Chromosomes that match in size, shape, and banding are
called homologous chromosomes, or homologs. The two
homologs of each pair contain the same set of genes, although for some of those genes, they may carry different
alleles. The differences between alleles occur at the molecular level and don’t show up in the microscope.
Figure 4.3 introduces a system of notation employed
throughout this book, using color to indicate degrees of relatedness between chromosomes. Thus, sister chromatids, which
are identical duplicates, appear in the same shade of the same
color. Homologous chromosomes, which carry the same
genes but may vary in the identity of particular alleles, are
pictured in different shades (light or dark) of the same color.
Nonhomologous chromosomes, which carry completely unrelated sets of genetic information, appear in different colors.
To study the chromosomes of a single organism, geneticists arrange micrographs of the stained chromosomes in homologous pairs of decreasing size to produce a karyotype.
Karyotype assembly can now be speeded and automated by computerized image analysis. Figure 4.4 shows the karyotype of a human male, with 46 chromosomes arranged in
22 matching pairs of chromosomes and one nonmatching
pair. The 44 chromosomes in matching pairs are known as
autosomes. The two unmatched chromosomes in this male
karyotype are called sex chromosomes because they determine the sex of the individual. (We discuss sex chromosomes in more detail in subsequent sections.)
Modern methods of DNA analysis can reveal differences between the maternally and paternally derived chromosomes of a homologous pair and can thus track the origin
of the extra chromosome 21 that causes Down syndrome in
individual patients. In 80% of cases, the third chromosome
21 comes from the egg; in 20%, from the sperm. The Genetics and Society box entitled Prenatal Genetic Diagnosis describes how physicians use karyotype analysis and a
technique called amniocentesis to diagnose Down syndrome
prenatally, roughly three months after a fetus is conceived.
Through thousands of karyotypes on normal individuals, cytologists have verified that the cells of each species
carry a distinctive diploid number of chromosomes. For example, Mendel’s peas contain 14 chromosomes in 7 pairs in
each diploid cell, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster
carries 8 chromosomes (4 pairs), macaroni wheat has 28
(14 pairs), giant sequoia trees 22 (11 pairs), goldfish 94
(47 pairs), dogs 78 (39 pairs), and people 46 (23 pairs). Differences in the size, shape, and number of chromosomes reflect
differences in the assembled genetic material that determines
what each species looks like and how it functions. As these
figures show, the number of chromosomes does not always
correlate with the size or complexity of the organism.
In the next section, you will see that the discovery that
chromosomes carry information about an individual’s sex
led to the realization that chromosomes carry the genes that
determine all traits.
Prenatal Genetic Diagnosis
The availability of amniocentesis and cell-free fetal DNA
analysis for prenatal diagnosis is intimately entwined with the
personal and societal issue of abortion. The large majority of amniocentesis procedures are performed with the understanding
that a fetus whose genotype indicates a genetic disorder, such as
Down syndrome, will be aborted. Some prospective parents who
are opposed to abortion still elect to undergo amniocentesis so
that they can better prepare for an affected child, but this is rare.
The ethical and political aspects of the abortion debate
influence many of the practical questions underlying prenatal
diagnosis. For example, parents must decide which genetic
conditions would be sufficiently severe that they would be willing to abort the fetus. From the economic point of view, society
must decide who should pay for prenatal diagnosis procedures.
In current practice, the risks and costs of amniocentesis generally restrict its application to women over age 35 or to mothers
whose fetuses are at high risk for a testable genetic condition
because of family history. The personal and societal equations
determining the frequency of prenatal testing may, however,
need to be overhauled in the not-too-distant future because
technological advances such as the analysis of cell-free fetal
DNA will minimize the costs and risks.
With new technologies for observing chromosomes and the DNA
in genes, modern geneticists can define an individual’s genotype
directly. Doctors can use this basic strategy to diagnose, before
birth, whether or not a baby will be born with a genetic condition.
The methods first developed for prenatal diagnosis were to
obtain fetal cells whose DNA and chromosomes could be analyzed
for genotype. The most frequently used method for acquiring these
cells is amniocentesis (Fig. A). To carry out this procedure, a doctor
inserts a needle through a pregnant woman’s abdominal wall into
the amniotic sac in which the fetus is growing; this procedure is
performed about 16 weeks after the woman’s last menstrual period. By using ultrasound imaging to guide the location of the needle, the doctor then withdraws some of the amniotic fluid in which
the fetus is suspended into a syringe. This fluid contains living cells
called amniocytes that were shed by the fetus. When placed in a
culture medium, these fetal cells undergo several rounds of mitosis
and increase in number. Once enough fetal cells are available, clinicians look at the chromosomes and genes in those cells. In later
chapters, we describe techniques that allow the direct examination
of the DNA constituting particular disease genes.
Amniocentesis also allows the diagnosis of Down syndrome through the analysis of chromosomes by karyotyping.
Because the risk of Down syndrome increases rapidly with the
age of the mother, more than half the pregnant women in North
America who are over the age of 35 currently undergo amniocentesis. Although the goal of this karyotyping is usually to learn
whether the fetus is trisomic for chromosome 21, many other
abnormalities in chromosome number or shape may show up
when the karyotype is examined.
More recently, scientists have been able to analyze the genotype of fetuses from the mother’s blood, bypassing the need to
obtain fetal cells. This procedure is made possible because the
mother’s blood contains cell-free fetal DNA. Fetal cells leak into the
mother’s bloodstream and then break down, releasing their DNA.
Modern DNA sequencing techniques allow geneticists not only to
genotype this material for particular disease-associated alleles, but
even to determine the fetus’s entire genome sequence. The analysis of fetal DNA obtained from the mother’s blood is still experimental, but it likely will replace amniocentesis in the near future
because drawing blood from the mother is inexpensive and noninvasive. The normal risk of miscarriage at 16 weeks’ gestation is
about 2–3%, and amniocentesis increases that risk by about 0.5%
(about 1 in 200 precedures). In contrast, analyzing cell-free DNA
from the mother’s blood cannot harm the fetus.
Obtaining fetal cells by amniocentesis. A
physician guides the insertion of the needle into the amniotic
sac (aided by ultrasound imaging) and extracts amniotic fluid
containing fetal cells into the syringe.
Chromosomes are cellular structures specialized for the
storage and transmission of genetic material.
•	 Genes are located on chromosomes and travel with them
during cell division and gamete formation.
•	 Somatic cells carry a precise number of homologous pairs
of chromosomes, which is characteristic of the species.
•	 In diploid organisms, one homolog of a pair is of maternal
origin, and the other paternal.
Sex Chromosomes
and Sex Determination
learning objectives
1. Predict the sex of humans with different complements
of X and Y chromosomes.
2. Describe the basis of sex reversal in humans.
3. Compare the means of sex determination in different
organisms.
Figure 4.6 The X and Y chromosomes determine sex  
in humans. (a) This colorized micrograph shows the human X
chromosome on the left and the human Y on the right. (b) Children
can receive only an X chromosome from their mother, but they can
inherit either an X or a Y from their father
Walter S. Sutton, a young American graduate student at
Columbia University in the first decade of the twentieth century, was one of the earliest cytologists to realize that
particular chromosomes carry the information for determining sex. In one study, he obtained cells from the testes of the
great lubber grasshopper (Brachystola magna; Fig. 4.5) and
followed them through the meiotic divisions that produce
sperm. He observed that prior to meiosis, precursor cells
within the testes of a great lubber grasshopper contain a total
of 24 chromosomes. Of these, 22 are found in 11 matched
pairs and are thus autosomes. The remaining two chromosomes are unmatched. He called the larger of these the X
chromosome and the smaller the Y chromosome.
After meiosis, the sperm produced within these testes
are of two equally prevalent types: one-half have a set of 11
autosomes plus an X chromosome, while the other half have
a set of 11 autosomes plus a Y. By comparison, all of the
eggs produced by females of the species carry an 11-plus-X
set of chromosomes like the set found in the first class of
sperm. When a sperm with an X chromosome fertilizes an
egg, an XX female grasshopper results; when a Y-containing
sperm fuses with an egg, an XY male develops. Sutton concluded that the X and Y chromosomes determine sex.
Figure 4.5 The great lubber grasshopper. In this mating
pair, the smaller male is astride the female.
Several researchers studying other organisms soon verified that in many sexually reproducing species, two distinct
chromosomes—known as the sex chromosomes—provide
the basis of sex determination. One sex carries two copies of
the same chromosome (a matching pair), while the other sex
has one of each type of sex chromosome (an unmatched
pair). The cells of normal human females, for example, contain 23 pairs of chromosomes. The two chromosomes of
each pair, including the sex-determining X chromosomes,
appear to be identical in size and shape. In males, however,
one unmatched pair of chromosomes is present: the larger of
these is the X; the smaller, the Y (Fig. 4.4 and Fig. 4.6a).
Apart from this difference in sex chromosomes, the two
sexes are not distinguishable at any other pair of chromosomes. Thus, geneticists can designate women as XX and
men as XY and represent sexual reproduction as a simple
cross between XX and XY.
If sex is an inherited trait determined by a pair of sex
chromosomes that separate to different cells during gamete
formation, then an XX × XY cross could account for both
the mutual exclusion of sexes and the near 1:1 ratio of
males to females, which are hallmark features of sex determination (Fig. 4.6b). And if chromosomes carry information defining the two contrasting sex phenotypes, we can
easily infer that chromosomes also carry genetic information specifying other characteristics as well.
In Humans, the SRY Gene
Determines Maleness
You have just seen that humans and other mammals have a
pair of sex chromosomes that are identical in the XX female
but different in the XY male. Several studies have shown that
in humans, it is the presence or absence of the Y that actually
makes the difference; that is, any person carrying a Y chromosome will look like a male. For example, rare humans
with two X and one Y chromosome (XXY) are males displaying certain abnormalities collectively called Klinefelter
syndrome. Klinefelter males are typically tall, thin, and sterile, and they sometimes show mental retardation. That these
individuals are males shows that two X chromosomes are
insufficient for female development in the presence of a Y.
In contrast, humans carrying an X and no second sex
chromosome (XO) are females with Turner syndrome. Turner
females are usually sterile, lack secondary sexual characteristics such as pubic hair, are of short stature, and have folds of
skin between their necks and shoulders (webbed necks). Even
though these individuals have only one X chromosome, they
develop as females because they have no Y chromosome.
In 1990, researchers discovered that it is not the entire
Y chromosome, but rather a single Y-chromosome-specific
gene called SRY (sex determining region of Y) that is the
primary determinant of maleness. The evidence implicating SRY came from so-called sex reversal: the existence of
XX males and XY females (Fig. 4.7). In many sex-reversed
XX males, one of the two X chromosomes carries a portion
of the Y chromosome. Although in different XX males,
different portions of the Y chromosome are found on the X,
one particular gene—SRY—is always present. Sex-reversed
XY females, in contrast, always have a Y chromosome
lacking a functional SRY gene; the portion of the Y chromosome containing SRY is either replaced by a portion of
the X chromosome, or the Y contains a nonfunctional mutant copy of SRY (Fig. 4.7). Later experiments with mice
confirmed that SRY indeed determines maleness. These
experiments are described in the Fast Forward Box
Transgenic Mice Prove That SRY Is the Maleness Factor.
SRY is one of about 110 protein-coding genes on the Y
chromosome. The two ends of the Y chromosome are called
the pseudoautosomal regions (PARs) because homologous
DNA sequences are present at the ends of the X chromosome (Fig. 4.8). The two PARs (PAR1 and PAR2) together contain about 30 genes, copies of which are found on both the X
and Y chromosomes.
Most of the Y chromosome, however, is called the
male-specific region (MSY) (Fig. 4.8); the functions of only
some of the genes in the MSY are understood. The MSY includes four Y-specific (and therefore male-specific) genes:
SRY and three genes required for spermatogenesis. The name
MSY is somewhat misleading because eight of the genes in
the MSY also exist on the X chromosome, but unlike the PAR
genes, they are not grouped together in one region of either the
X or Y. These eight MSY genes affect the functions of cells
and tissues all over the body. In fact, several of these MSY
genes shared with X are essential for male viability because
without the Y-linked copies, the single gene copies on the X
chromosome do not supply sufficient protein. (Females normally express both alleles of the X-linked copies of these eight
genes, as these genes escape a phenomenon described later in
this chapter.) 
Figure 4.7 Sex reversal. Sex-reversed XX males have a part of
the Y including the SRY gene on one of their X chromosomes. Sexreversed XY females lack SRY on their Y chromosome either because
it has been replaced by part of the X chromosome or because it has
been inactivated by mutation.
Figure 4.8 Human sex chromosomes have both shared
and unique genes. PAR1 and PAR2 (black) are homologous
regions of the X and Y chromosomes that together contain about
30 genes. The MSY region contains genes needed for maleness
itself (SRY), genes for male fertility, and essential genes shared with
the X required for male viability because their X-linked counterparts
alone do not produce enough protein.

Includes:
• SRY
• 3 Male fertility genes
• 8 Essential genes shared with X
MSY
region
Y
PAR2
PAR1
PAR
Transgenic Mice Prove That SRY Is the Maleness Factor
Genes similar to human SRY have been identified on the Y chromosomes of nearly all mammalian species. In 1991, researchers
used mouse transgenic technology to show definitively that the
SRY gene is the crucial determinant of maleness. A transgenic
mouse is one whose genome contains copies of a gene that came
from another individual—or even from another species. Such
genes are called transgenes. One focus of genetic engineering is
technology for the manipulation and insertion of transgenes.
To determine if SRY is sufficient to determine maleness,
researchers wanted to introduce copies of the mouse SRY gene into the genome of chromosomally female (XX) mice. If SRY is
the crucial determinant of maleness, then XX mice containing
an SRY transgene would nevertheless be male.
First, the scientists isolated the DNA of the mouse SRY gene
using cloning technology to be discussed in later chapters. Next,
using a method called pronuclear injection, transgenic mice were
generated that contained the SRY gene on one of their autosomes. To perform pronuclear injection, researchers collected
many fertilized mouse eggs from mated females and injected the
sperm or egg nucleus (called a pronucleus when in the zygote)
with hundreds of copies of the SRY gene DNA (Fig. A). Enzymes
in the pronucleus integrated the DNA into random locations in
the genome (Fig. A).
After the injected zygotes matured into early embryos, they
were implanted into surrogate mothers. When the mice were
born, cells were taken from their tails and tested for the presence
of the SRY transgene using molecular biology techniques.
Figure B shows at the right a transgenic mouse (transformed
with SRY) obtained in this study. Although it is chromosomally XX,
it is phenotypically male. This result demonstrates conclusively
that the SRY gene alone is sufficient to determine maleness.
Figure A Using pronuclear injection to generate mice 
transgenic for the SRY gene.
(1): © Brigid Hogan, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vanderbilt University;
(2): © Charles River Laboratories
Figure B An XX mouse transformed with SRY is 
phenotypically male. Both the transformed XX mouse at the
right and its normal XY littermate at the left have normal male
genitalia. Arrows point to the penis.
© Medical Research Council/Science Source
The X chromosome contains about 1100 genes, most
of which have nothing to do with sex; they specify proteins
needed by both males and females.
Why does having an SRY gene mean that you will be
male and not having SRY mean that you will be female?
Approximately six weeks after fertilization, SRY protein
activates testes development in XY (or sex-reversed XX)
embryos. The embryonic testes secrete hormones that trigger the development of male sex organs and prevent the
formation of female sex organs. In the absence of SRY
protein, an ovary develops instead of a testis, and other
female sex organs develop by default. Tail cells tested for presence
of SRY transgene
TABLE 4.1 Sex Determination in Fruit Flies and Humans
Complement of Sex Chromosomes
XXX XX XXY XO XY XYY OY
Drosophila Dies Normal female Normal female Sterile male Normal male Normal male Dies
Humans Nearly Normal female Klinefelter Turner female Normal male Normal or Dies
normal male (sterile); (sterile); short, nearly normal
female tall, thin webbed neck male
Humans can tolerate extra X chromosomes (e.g., XXX) better than can Drosophila because in humans all but one X chromosome becomes a Barr body, as discussed
later in this chapter. Complete absence of an X chromosome is lethal to both fruit flies and humans. Additional Y chromosomes have little effect in either species.
Although the Y chromosome in Drosophila does not determine whether a fly looks like a male, it is necessary for male fertility; XO flies are thus sterile males.
TABLE 4.2 Mechanisms of Sex 
Determination
♀ ♂
Humans and XX XY
Drosophila
Moths and XX
C. elegans (hermaphrodites X0
in C. elegans)
Birds and ZW ZZ
Butterflies
Bees and Diploid Haploid
Wasps
Lizards and Cool Warm
Alligators temperature temperature
Tortoises and Warm Cool
Turtles temperature temperature
Anemone Fish Older adults Young adults
In the species in the top three rows, sex is determined by sex chromosomes. The
species in the bottom four rows have identical chromosomes in the two sexes,
and sex is determined instead by environmental or other factors. Anemone fish
(bottom row) undergo a sex change from male to female as they age.
Species Vary Enormously in Sex
Determining Mechanisms
Other species show variations on this XX versus XY chromosomal strategy of sex determination. In fruit flies, for
example, although normal females are XX and normal
males XY (see Fig. 4.2), it is ultimately the number of X
chromosomes (and not the presence or absence of the Y)
that determines sex. The different responses of humans and
Drosophila to the same unusual complements of sex chromosomes (Table 4.1) reveal that the mechanisms for sex
determination differ in flies and humans. XXY flies are
female because they have two X chromosomes, but XXY
humans are male because they have a Y. Conversely, because they have one X chromosome, XO flies are male,
while XO humans are female because they lack a Y.
The XX = female / XY = male strategy of sex determination is by no means universal. In some species of moths,
for example, the females are XX, but the males are XO. In C.
elegans (one species of nematode), males are similarly XO,
but XX individuals are not females; they are instead selffertilizing hermaphrodites that produce both eggs and sperm.
In birds and butterflies, males have the matching sex chromosomes, while females have an unmatched set; in such species, geneticists represent the sex chromosomes as ZZ in the
male and ZW in the female. The sex having two different sex
chromosomes is termed the heterogametic sex because it
gives rise to two different types of gametes; conversely, the
sex with two similar sex chromosomes is the homogametic
sex. The gametes of the heterogametic sex would contain
either X or Y in the case of male humans, and either Z or W
in the case of female birds; the gametes of the homogametic
sex would contain only an X (humans) or only a Z (birds).
Yet other variations include the complicated sex-determination
mechanisms of bees and wasps, in which females are diploid
and males haploid, and the systems of certain fish, in which
sex is determined by changes in the environment, such as
fluctuations in temperature. Table 4.2 summarizes some of
the astonishing variety in the ways that different species have
solved the problem of assigning sex to individuals.
In spite of these many differences between species,
early researchers concluded that chromosomes can carry
the genetic information specifying sexual characteristics 
and probably many other traits as well. Sutton and other
early adherents of the chromosome theory realized that the
perpetuation of life itself therefore depends on the proper
distribution of chromosomes during cell division. In the
next sections, you will see that the behavior of chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis is exactly that expected
of cellular structures carrying genes.
Many sexually reproducing organisms have sex
chromosomes that are sex-specific and that determine sex.
•	 In humans, male sex determination is triggered by a
Y-linked gene called SRY; female sex determination
occurs in XX embryos by default.
•	 Mechanisms of sex determination vary remarkably; in
some species sex is determined by environmental factors
rather than by specific chromosomes
Mitosis: Cell Division That
Preserves Chromosome Number
learning objectives
1. Describe the key chromosome behaviors during mitosis.
2. Diagram the forces and structures that dictate
chromosomal movement during mitosis.
The fertilized human egg is a single diploid cell that preserves its genetic identity unchanged through more than
100 generations of cells as it divides again and again to
produce a full-term infant ready to be born. As the newborn
infant develops into a toddler, a teenager, and an adult, yet
more cell divisions fuel continued growth and maturation.
Mitosis, the nuclear division that apportions chromosomes
in equal fashion to two daughter cells, is the cellular mechanism that preserves genetic information through all these
generations of cells. In this section, we take a close look at
how the nuclear division of mitosis fits into the overall
scheme of cell growth and division.
If you were to peer through a microscope and follow the
history of one cell through time, you would see that for much
of your observation, the chromosomes resemble a mass
of extremely fine tangled string—called chromatin—
surrounded by the nuclear envelope. Each convoluted
thread of chromatin is composed mainly of DNA (which
carries the genetic information) and protein (which serves as
a scaffold for packaging and managing that information, as
described in Chapter 12). You would also be able to distinguish one or two darker areas of chromatin called nucleoli
(singular, nucleolus, literally small nucleus); nucleoli play a
key role in the manufacture of ribosomes, organelles that
function in protein synthesis. During the period between cell
divisions, the chromatin-laden nucleus houses a great deal of
invisible activity necessary for the growth and survival of the
cell. One particularly important part of this activity is the
accurate duplication of all the chromosomal material.
With continued vigilance, you would observe a dramatic
change in the nuclear landscape during one very short period
in the cell’s life history: The chromatin condenses into discrete threads, and then each chromosome compacts even further into the twin rods clamped together at their centromeres
that can be identified in karyotype analysis (review Fig. 4.3).
Each rod in a duo is called a chromatid; as described earlier,
it is an exact duplicate of the other sister chromatid to which
it is connected. Continued observation would reveal the doubled chromosomes beginning to jostle around inside the cell,
eventually lining up at the cell’s midplane. At this point, the
sister chromatids of each chromosome separate to opposite
poles of the now elongating cell, where they become identical sets of chromosomes. Each of the two identical sets
eventually ends up enclosed in a separate nucleus in a separate cell. The two cells, known as daughter cells, are thus
genetically identical.
The repeating pattern of cell growth (an increase in
size) followed by division (the splitting of one cell into
two) is called the cell cycle (Fig. 4.9). Only a small part of
the cell cycle is spent in division (or M phase); the period
between divisions is called interphase.
During Interphase, Cells Grow and
Replicate Their Chromosomes
Interphase consists of three parts: gap 1 (G1), synthesis (S),
and gap 2 (G2) (Fig. 4.9). G1 lasts from the birth of a new cell
to the onset of chromosome replication; for the genetic material, it is a period when the chromosomes are neither duplicating nor dividing. During this time, the cell achieves most
of its growth by using the information from its genes to make
and assemble the materials it needs to function normally. G1
varies in length more than any other phase of the cell cycle.
In rapidly dividing cells of the human embryo, for example,
G1 is as short as a few hours. In contrast, mature brain cells become arrested in a resting form of G1 known as G0 and do
not normally divide again during a person’s lifetime.
Synthesis (S) is the time when the cell duplicates its
genetic material by synthesizing DNA. During duplication,
each chromosome doubles to produce identical sister chromatids that will become visible when the chromosomes condense at the beginning of mitosis. The two sister chromatids
remain joined to each other at their centromeres. (Note that
this joined structure is considered a single chromosome as
long as the connection between sister chromatids is maintained.) The replication of chromosomes during S phase is
crucial; the genetic material must be copied exactly so that
both daughter cells receive identical sets of chromosomes.
Gap 2 (G2) is the interval between chromosome duplication and the beginning of mitosis. During this time, the
cell may grow (usually less than during G1); it also synthesizes proteins that are essential to the subsequent steps of
mitosis itself.
In addition, during interphase an array of fine microtubules crucial for many biochemical processes becomes visible outside the nucleus. The microtubules radiate out into the
cytoplasm from a single organizing center known as the
centrosome, usually located near the nuclear envelope. In
animal cells, the discernible core of each centrosome is a
pair of small, darkly staining bodies called centrioles
(Fig. 4.10a); the microtubule-organizing center of plants
does not contain centrioles. During the S and G2 stages of
interphase, the centrosomes replicate, producing two centrosomes that remain in extremely close proximity.
Figure 4.9 The cell cycle: An alternation between 
interphase and mitosis. (a) Chromosomes replicate to form sister
chromatids during synthesis (S phase); the sister chromatids segregate
to daughter cells during mitosis (M phase). The gaps between the S
and M phases, during which most cell growth takes place, are called
the G1 and G2 phases. In multicellular organisms, some terminally
differentiated cells stop dividing and arrest in a G0 stage. (b) Interphase
consists of the G1, S, and G2 phases together.
During Mitosis, Sister Chromatids
Separate and Two Daughter Nuclei Form
Although the rigorously choreographed events of nuclear
and cellular division occur as a dynamic and continuous
process, scientists traditionally analyze the process in separate stages marked by visible cytological events. The artist’s sketches in Fig. 4.10 illustrate these stages in the
nematode Ascaris, whose diploid cells contain only four
chromosomes (two pairs of homologous chromosomes).
Prophase: Chromosomes condense (Fig. 4.10a)
During all of interphase, the cell nucleus remains intact,
and the chromosomes are indistinguishable aggregates of
chromatin. At prophase (from the Greek pro- meaning
before), the gradual emergence, or condensation, of individual chromosomes from the undifferentiated mass of
chromatin marks the beginning of mitosis. Each condensing chromosome has already been duplicated during interphase and thus consists of sister chromatids attached at
their centromeres. At this stage in Ascaris cells, therefore,
four chromosomes exist with a total of eight chromatids.
The progressive appearance of an array of individual
chromosomes is a truly impressive event. Interphase DNA molecules as long as 3–4 cm condense into discrete chromosomes whose length is measured in microns (millionths
of a meter). This process is equivalent to compacting a 200 m
length of thin string (as long as two football fields) into a
cylinder 8 mm long and 1 mm wide.
Another visible change in chromatin also takes place
during prophase: The darkly staining nucleoli begin to break
down and disappear. As a result, the manufacture of ribosomes ceases, providing one indication that general cellular
metabolism shuts down so that the cell can focus its energy
on chromosome movements and cellular division.
Several important events that characterize prophase occur outside the nucleus in the cytoplasm. The centrosomes,
which replicated during interphase, now move apart and become clearly distinguishable as two separate entities in the
light microscope. At the same time, the interphase scaffolding of long, stable microtubules disappears and is replaced
by a set of dynamic microtubules that rapidly grow from and
shrink back toward their centrosomal organizing centers.
The centrosomes continue to move apart, migrating around
the nuclear envelope toward opposite ends of the nucleus,
apparently propelled by forces exerted between interdigitated microtubules extending from the two centrosomes.
Prometaphase: The spindle forms (Fig. 4.10b)
Prometaphase (before middle stage) begins with the breakdown of the nuclear envelope, which allows microtubules extending from the two centrosomes to invade the nucleus.
Chromosomes attach to these microtubules through the
kinetochore, a structure in the centromere region of each
chromatid that is specialized for conveyance. Each kinetochore contains proteins that act as molecular motors, enabling
the chromosome to slide along the microtubule. When the kinetochore of a chromatid originally contacts a microtubule at
prometaphase, the kinetochore-based motor moves the entire
chromosome toward the centrosome from which that microtubule radiates. Microtubules growing from the two centrosomes capture chromosomes by connecting first to the
kinetochore of one of the two sister chromatids, chosen at
random. As a result, it is sometimes possible to observe groups
of chromosomes congregating in the vicinity of each centrosome. In this early part of prometaphase, for each chromosome, one chromatid’s kinetochore is attached to a microtubule,
but the sister chromatid’s kinetochore remains unattached.
During prometaphase, three different types of microtubule fibers together form the mitotic spindle. All of these
microtubule classes originate from the centrosomes, which
function as the two poles of the spindle apparatus. Microtubules that extend between a centrosome and the kinetochore
of a chromatid are called kinetochore microtubules, or centromeric fibers. Microtubules from each centrosome that are
directed toward the middle of the cell are polar microtubules; polar microtubules originating in opposite centrosomes interdigitate near the cell’s equator. Finally, short
astral microtubules extend out from the centrosome toward
the cell’s periphery.
Soon before the end of prometaphase, the kinetochore
of each chromosome’s previously unattached sister chromatid now associates with microtubules extending from
the opposite centrosome. This event orients each chromosome such that one sister chromatid faces one pole of the
cell and the other faces the opposite pole. Experimental
manipulation has shown that if both kinetochores become
attached to microtubules from the same pole, the configuration is unstable; one of the kinetochores will detach repeatedly from the spindle until it associates with microtubules
from the other pole. The attachment of sister chromatids to
opposite spindle poles is the only stable arrangement.
Metaphase: Chromosomes align  
at the cell’s equator (Fig. 4.10c)
During metaphase (middle stage), the connection of sister
chromatids to opposite spindle poles sets in motion a series
of jostling movements that cause the chromosomes to move
toward an imaginary equator halfway between the two
poles. The imaginary midline is called the metaphase
plate. When the chromosomes are aligned along it, the
forces pulling sister chromatids toward opposite poles are
in a balanced equilibrium maintained by tension across the
chromosomes. Tension results from the fact that the sister
chromatids are pulled in opposite directions while they are
still connected to each other by the tight cohesion of their
centromeres. Tension compensates for any chance movement away from the metaphase plate by restoring the chromosome to its position equidistant between the poles.
Anaphase: Sister chromatids move  
to opposite spindle poles (Fig. 4.10d)
The nearly simultaneous severing of the centromeric connections between the sister chromatids of all chromosomes
indicates that anaphase (from the Greek ana- meaning up
as in up toward the poles) is underway. The separation of
sister chromatids allows each chromatid to be pulled toward the spindle pole to which it is linked by kinetochore
microtubules; as the chromatid moves toward the pole, its
kinetochore microtubules shorten. Because the arms of the
chromatids lag behind the kinetochores, metacentric chromatids have a characteristic V shape during anaphase. The
attachment of sister chromatids to microtubules emanating
from opposite spindle poles means that the genetic information migrating toward one pole is exactly the same as its
counterpart moving toward the opposite pole.
Telophase: Identical sets of chromosomes  
are enclosed in two nuclei (Fig. 4.10e)
The final transformation of chromosomes and the nucleus
during mitosis happens at telophase (from the Greek telomeaning end). Telophase is like a rewind of prophase.
The spindle fibers begin to disperse; a nuclear envelope
forms around the group of chromatids at each pole; and one
or more nucleoli reappear. The former chromatids now function as independent chromosomes, which decondense (uncoil) and dissolve into a tangled mass of chromatin. Mitosis,
the division of one nucleus into two identical nuclei, is over.
Cytokinesis: The cytoplasm divides (Fig. 4.10f)
In the final stage of cell division, the daughter nuclei emerging
at the end of telophase are packaged into two separate daughter cells. This final stage of division is called cytokinesis
(literally cell movement). During cytokinesis, the elongated
parent cell separates into two smaller independent daughter
cells with identical nuclei. Cytokinesis usually begins during
anaphase, but it is not completed until after telophase.
The mechanism by which cells accomplish cytokinesis
differs in animals and plants. In animal cells, cytoplasmic division depends on a contractile ring that pinches the cell into
two approximately equal halves, similar to the way the pulling
of a string closes the opening of a bag of marbles (Fig. 4.11a).
Intriguingly, some types of molecules that form the contractile
ring also participate in the mechanism responsible for muscle
contraction. In plants, whose cells are surrounded by a rigid
cell wall, a membrane-enclosed disk, known as the cell plate,
forms inside the cell near the equator and then grows rapidly
outward, thereby dividing the cell in two (Fig. 4.11b).
During cytokinesis, a large number of important organelles and other cellular components, including ribosomes,
mitochondria, membranous structures such as Golgi bodies, and (in plants) chloroplasts, must be parceled out to
the emerging daughter cells. The mechanism accomplishing this task does not appear to predetermine which organelle is destined for which daughter cell. Instead, because
most cells contain many copies of these cytoplasmic structures, each new cell is bound to receive at least a few representatives of each component. This original complement of
structures is enough to sustain the cell until synthetic activity can repopulate the cytoplasm with organelles.
Sometimes cytoplasmic division does not immediately
follow nuclear division, and the result is a cell containing
more than one nucleus. An animal cell with two or more
nuclei is known as a syncytium. The early embryos of fruit
flies are multinucleated syncytia (Fig. 4.12), as are the precursors of spermatozoa in humans and many other animals.
A multinucleate plant tissue is called a coenocyte; coconut
milk is a nutrient-rich food composed of coenocytes.
Mitosis maintains the chromosome number of the parent cell in the two daughter nuclei. In the
photomicrographs of newt lung cells at the left, chromosomes are stained blue and microtubules appear either green or yellow. Note that the
drawings are of Ascaris cells (2n = 4).
a–f: © Photomicrographs by Dr. Conly L. Rieder, Wadsworth Center, Albany, New York 12201-0509
Centriole
(a) Prophase: (1) Chromosomes condense and
become visible; (2) centrosomes move apart
toward opposite poles and generate new
microtubules; (3) nucleoli begin to disappear.
Astral microtubules
Kinetochore
Kinetochore
microtubules
Polar
microtubules
(b) Prometaphase: (1) Nuclear envelope breaks
down; (2) microtubules from the centrosomes
invade the nucleus; (3) sister chromatids attach
to microtubules from opposite centrosomes.
Metaphase
plate
(c) Metaphase: Chromosomes align on the
metaphase plate with sister chromatids facing
opposite poles.
Separating sister
chromatids
(d) Anaphase: (1) The connection between the
centromeres of the sister chromatids is severed;
(2) the now separated sister chromatids move to
opposite poles.
Nucleoli reappear
Re-forming
nuclear envelope
Chromatin
(e) Telophase: (1) Nuclear membranes and
nucleoli re-form; (2) spindle fibers disappear;
(3) chromosomes uncoil and become a tangle
of chromatin.
(f) Cytokinesis: The cytoplasm divides, splitting
the elongated parent cell into two daughter
cells with identical nuclei.
Figure 4.11 Cytokinesis: The cytoplasm divides, producing 
two daughter cells. (a) In this dividing frog zygote, the contractile
ring at the cell’s periphery has contracted to form a cleavage furrow
that will eventually pinch the cell in two. (b) In this dividing onion root
cell, a cell plate that began forming near the equator of the cell
expands to the periphery, separating the two daughter cells.
a: © Don W. Fawcett/Science Source; b: © McGraw-Hill Education/Al Telser
Contractile
ring
Cleavage furrow
(a) Cytokinesis in an animal cell
(b) Cytokinesis in a plant cell
Cell
plate
Figure 4.12 If cytokinesis does not follow mitosis, one 
cell may contain many nuclei. In fertilized Drosophila eggs,
13 rounds of mitosis take place without cytokinesis. The result is a
single-celled syncytial embryo that contains several thousand nuclei.
The photograph shows part of an embryo with dividing nuclei;
chromosomes are in red, and spindle fibers are in green. Nuclei at
the upper left are in metaphase, while nuclei toward the bottom
right are progressively later in anaphase. Membranes eventually
grow around these nuclei, dividing the embryo into cells.
© Dr. Byron Williams/Cornell University
Figure 4.13 Checkpoints help regulate the cell cycle.
Cellular checkpoints (red wedges) ensure that important events in
the cell cycle occur in the proper sequence. At each checkpoint,
the cell determines whether prior events have been completed
before it can proceed to the next step of the cell cycle. (For
simplicity, we show only two chromosomes per cell.)

Metaphase
Anaphase
Telophase
and
cytokinesis
Interphase
Ongoing
protein
synthesis
and
cell growth
• Have all
chromosomes
arrived and
aligned at the
metaphase
plate?
THEN: Initiate
anaphase
• Have the
chromosomes
been completely
duplicated?
THEN: Enter
mitosis
Is cell of sucient
size?
• Have proper signals
been received?
THEN: Duplicate
chromosomes and
centrosomes
Chromosome
and
centrosome
duplication
Regulatory Checkpoints Ensure Correct
Chromosome Separation
The cell cycle is a complex sequence of precisely coordinated events. In higher organisms, a cell’s “decision” to divide
depends on both intrinsic factors, such as conditions within
the cell that register a sufficient size for division, and signals
from the environment, such as hormonal cues or contacts
with neighboring cells that encourage or restrain division.
Once a cell has initiated events leading to division, usually
during the G1 period of interphase, everything else follows
like clockwork. A number of checkpoints—moments at  which the cell evaluates the results of previous steps—allow
the sequential coordination of cell-cycle events (Fig. 4.13).
For example, the enzymes operating in one type of checkpoint monitor DNA replication to ensure that cells do not
begin mitosis until all the chromosomes have been completely copied. If this checkpoint did not exist, at least one of
the daughter cells would lose DNA every cell cycle.
In a second illustration of the molecular basis of checkpoints, even a single kinetochore that has not attached to
spindle fibers generates a molecular signal that prevents the
sister chromatids of all chromosomes from separating at
their centromeres. This signal makes the beginning of anaphase dependent on the prior proper alignment of all the
chromosomes at metaphase. As a result of this cell-cycle
checkpoint, each daughter cell reliably receives the right
number of chromosomes.
Breakdown of the mitotic machinery can produce division mistakes that have crucial consequences for the cell.
Improper chromosome segregation, for example, can cause
serious malfunction or even the death of daughter cells.
Gene mutations that disrupt mitotic structures, such as the spindle, kinetochores, or centrosomes, are one source of improper segregation. Other problems occur in cells where the
normal restraints on cell division, such as checkpoints, have
broken down. Such cells may divide uncontrollably, leading
to a tumor. We present the details of cell-cycle regulation,
checkpoint controls, and cancer formation in Chapter 20.
Through mitosis, diploid cells produce identical diploid
progeny cells.
•	 At metaphase, the sister chromatids are being pulled at
their kinetochores toward opposite spindle poles; these
poleward forces are balanced because the chromatids
are connected at their centromeres.
•	 At the beginning of anaphase, the connections between
sister centromeres are severed so sister chromatids
separate and move to opposite spindle poles.
•	 Cell cycle checkpoints help ensure correct duplication
and separation of chromosomes.
Meiosis: Cell Divisions That
Halve Chromosome Number
learning objectives
1. Describe the key chromosome behaviors during
meiosis that lead to haploid gametes.
2. Compare chromosome behaviors during mitosis
and meiosis.
3. Explain how the independent alignment of homologs,
and also crossing-over during the first meiotic division,
each contribute to the genetic diversity of gametes.
During the many rounds of cell division within an embryo,
most cells either grow and divide via the mitotic cell cycle
just described, or they stop growing and become arrested in
G0. These mitotically dividing and G0-arrested cells are the
so-called somatic cells whose descendants continue to make
up the vast majority of each organism’s tissues throughout
the lifetime of the individual. Early in the embryonic development of animals, however, a group of cells is set aside for
a different fate. These are the germ cells: cells destined for a
specialized role in the production of gametes. Germ cells
arise later in plants, during floral development instead of
during embryogenesis. The germ cells become incorporated
in the reproductive organs—ovaries and testes in animals,
ovaries and anthers in flowering plants—where they ultimately undergo meiosis, the special two-part cell division
that produces gametes (eggs and sperm) containing half the
number of chromosomes other body cells have.
Figure 4.14 An overview of meiosis: The chromosomes 
replicate once, while the nuclei divide twice. In this figure, all
four chromatids of each chromosome pair are shown in the same
shade of the same color. Note that the chromosomes duplicate before
meiosis I, but they do not duplicate between meiosis I and meiosis II. 
Chromosomes
duplicate
Meiosis
Meiosis
No duplication
No duplication
The union of haploid gametes at fertilization yields diploid offspring that carry the combined genetic heritage of
two parents. Sexual reproduction therefore requires the alternation of haploid and diploid generations of cells. If gametes
were diploid rather than haploid, the number of chromosomes would double in each successive generation. In humans, for example, the children would have 92 chromosomes
per cell, the grandchildren 184, and so on. Meiosis prevents
this lethal, exponential accumulation of chromosomes.
In Meiosis, the Chromosomes Replicate
Once but the Nucleus Divides Twice
Unlike mitosis, meiosis consists of two successive nuclear divisions, logically named division I of meiosis and division II of
meiosis, or simply meiosis I and meiosis II. With each round,
the cell passes through a prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and
telophase. In meiosis I, the parent nucleus divides to form two
daughter nuclei; in meiosis II, each of the two daughter nuclei
divides, resulting in four nuclei (Fig. 4.14). These four
nuclei—the final products of meiosis—become partitioned in
four separate daughter cells because cytokinesis occurs after
both rounds of division. The chromosomes duplicate at the
start of meiosis I, but they do not duplicate in meiosis II, which
explains why the gametes contain half the number of chromosomes found in somatic cells. A close look at each round of
meiotic division reveals the mechanisms by which each gamete comes to receive one full haploid set of chromosomes.
During Meiosis I, Homologs Pair,
Exchange Parts, and Then Segregate
The events of meiosis I are unique among nuclear divisions
(Fig. 4.15, meiosis I). The process begins with the replication
Meiosis: One Diploid Cell Produces Four Haploid Cells
Prophase I: Leptotene
1. Chromosomes thicken and become
visible, but the chromatids remain
invisible.
2. Centrosomes begin to move toward
opposite poles.
Anaphase I
1. Sister centromeres remain connected to each
other.
2. The chiasmata dissolve.
3. Homologous chromosomes move to
opposite poles.
Metaphase I
1. Tetrads line up along the metaphase plate.
2. Each chromosome of a homologous pair
attaches to fibers from opposite poles.
3. Sister chromatids attach to fibers from the
same pole.
Prophase I: Zygotene
1. Homologous chromosomes enter
synapsis.
2. The synaptonemal complex forms.
Prophase I: Pachytene
1. Synapsis is complete.
2. Crossing-over, genetic exchange between
nonsister chromatids of a homologous
pair, occurs.
Meiosis I: A reductional division
To aid visualization
of the chromosomes, the figure is
simplified in two ways: (1) The nuclear
envelope is not shown during prophase
of either meiotic division. (2) The
chromosomes are shown as fully
condensed at zygotene; in reality, full
condensation is not achieved until
diakinesis.
Prophase I: Diplotene
1. Synaptonemal complex dissolves.
2. A tetrad of four chromatids is visible.
3. Crossover points appear as chiasmata,
holding nonsister chromatids together.
4. Meiotic arrest occurs at this time in many
species.
Prophase I: Diakinesis
1. Chromatids thicken and shorten.
2. At the end of prophase I, the nuclear
membrane (not shown earlier) breaks
down, and the spindle begins to form.
Telophase I
1. The nuclear envelope re-forms.
2. Resultant cells have half the number of
chromosomes, each consisting of two
sister chromatids.
3. Cytokinesis separates the daughter
cells (not shown).
Interkinesis
1. This is similar to interphase with one
important exception: No chromosomal
duplication takes place.
2. In some species, the chromosomes
decondense; in others, they do not.
Telophase II
1. Chromosomes begin to uncoil.
2. Nuclear envelopes and nucleoli (not
shown) re-form.
Cytokinesis
1. The cytoplasm divides, forming four
new haploid cells.
Metaphase I
1. Tetrads line up along the metaphase plate.
2. Each chromosome of a homologous pair
attaches to fibers from opposite poles.
3. Sister chromatids attach to fibers from the
same pole.
Prophase I: Zygotene
1. Homologous chromosomes enter
synapsis.
2. The synaptonemal complex forms.
Prophase I: Pachytene
1. Synapsis is complete.
2. Crossing-over, genetic exchange between
nonsister chromatids of a homologous
pair, occurs.
Meiosis I: A reductional division
Metaphase II
1. Chromosomes align at the metaphase
plate.
2. Sister chromatids attach to spindle fibers
from opposite poles.
Prophase II
1. Chromosomes condense.
2. Centrioles move toward the poles.
3. The nuclear envelope breaks down at the
end of prophase II (not shown).
Meiosis II: An equational division
Anaphase II
1. Sister centromeres detach from each
other, allowing sister chromatids to move
to opposite poles
of chromosomes, after which each one consists of two sister
chromatids. A key to understanding meiosis I is the observation that the centromeres of these sister chromatids remain
connected throughout the entire division, rather than separating from each other as in mitosis.
As meiosis I proceeds, homologous chromosomes
align across the cellular equator to form a coupling that
ensures proper chromosome segregation later in the division. Moreover, during the time homologous chromosomes face each other across the equator, the maternal
and paternal chromosomes of each homologous pair may
exchange parts, creating new combinations of alleles at
different genes along the chromosomes. Afterward, the
two homologous chromosomes, each still consisting of
two sister chromatids connected at their centromeres, are
pulled to opposite poles of the spindle. As a result, it is
homologous chromosomes (rather than sister chromatids
as in mitosis) that segregate into different daughter cells
at the conclusion of the first meiotic division. With this
overview in mind, let us take a closer look at the specific
events of meiosis I, remembering that we analyze a dynamic, flowing sequence of cellular events by breaking it
down somewhat arbitrarily into the easily pictured, traditional phases.
Prophase I: Homologs condense and pair,  
and crossing-over occurs
Among the crucial events of prophase I are the condensation of chromatin, the pairing of homologous chromosomes, and the reciprocal exchange of genetic information
between these paired homologs. Figure 4.15 shows a generalized view of prophase I; however, research suggests
that the exact sequence of events may vary in different species. These complicated processes can take many days,
months, or even years to complete. For example, in the female germ cells of several species, including humans, meiosis is suspended at prophase I for many years until
ovulation (as will be discussed further in Section 4.5).
Leptotene (from the Greek for thin and delicate) is the
first definable substage of prophase I, the time when the
long, thin chromosomes begin to thicken (see Fig. 4.16a for
a more detailed view). Each chromosome has already duplicated prior to prophase I (as in mitosis) and thus consists of
two sister chromatids affixed at their centromeres. At this
point, however, these sister chromatids are so tightly bound
together that they are not yet visible as separate entities.
Zygotene (from the Greek for conjugation) begins as
each chromosome seeks out its homologous partner and
the matching chromosomes become zipped together in a
Prophase I of meiosis at very high magnification.
(a) Leptotene: Threadlike chromosomes begin
to condense and thicken, becoming visible
as discrete structures. Although the
chromosomes have duplicated, the sister
chromatids of each chromosome are not
yet visible in the microscope.
(b) Zygotene: Chromosomes are clearly
visible and begin pairing with homologous
chromosomes along the synaptonemal
complex to form a bivalent, or tetrad.
(c) Pachytene: Full synapsis of homologs.
Recombination nodules appear along the
synaptonemal complex.
(d) Diplotene: Bivalent pulls apart slightly,
but homologous chromosomes remain
connected due to recombination at
crossover sites (chiasmata).
(e) Diakinesis: Further condensation
of the bivalent.
Homologous
chromosomes
Synaptonemal
complex
Synaptonemal
complex
Recombination
nodules
Sister chromatid 1
Sister chromatid 2
+
Sister chromatid 3
Sister chromatid 4
Diplotene: Bivalent pulls apart slightly,
but homologous chromosomes remain
connected due to recombination at
crossover sites (chiasmata).
(e) Diakinesis: Further condensation
of the bivalent.
process known as synapsis. The “zipper” itself is an elaborate protein structure called the synaptonemal complex
that aligns the homologs with remarkable precision, juxtaposing the corresponding genetic regions of the chromosome pair (Fig. 4.16b).
Pachytene (from the Greek for thick or fat) begins at
the completion of synapsis when homologous chromosomes are united along their length. Each synapsed chromosome pair is known as a bivalent (because it encompasses
two chromosomes), or a tetrad (because it contains four
chromatids). On one side of the bivalent is a maternally derived chromosome, on the other side a paternally derived
one. Because X and Y chromosomes are not identical, they
do not synapse completely. However, the pseudoautosomal
regions previously shown in Fig. 4.8 provide small stretches
of similarity between the X and the Y chromosomes that
allow them to pair with each other during meiosis I in males.
During pachytene, structures called recombination
nodules begin to appear along the synaptonemal complex,
and an exchange of parts between nonsister (that is, between maternal and paternal) chromatids occurs at these
nodules (see Fig. 4.16c for details). Such an exchange is
known as crossing-over; it results in the recombination of
genetic material. As a result of crossing-over, chromatids
may no longer be of purely maternal or paternal origin;
however, no genetic information is gained or lost, so all
chromatids retain their original size.
Diplotene (from the Greek for twofold or double) is
signaled by the gradual dissolution of the synaptonemal
zipper complex and a slight separation of regions of the
homologous chromosomes (see Fig. 4.16d). The aligned
homologous chromosomes of each bivalent nonetheless remain very tightly merged at intervals along their length
called chiasmata (singular, chiasma), which represent the
sites where crossing-over occurred.
Diakinesis (from the Greek for double movement) is
accompanied by further condensation of the chromatids.
Because of this chromatid thickening and shortening, it can
now clearly be seen that each tetrad consists of four separate chromatids, or viewed in another way, that the two
homologous chromosomes of a bivalent are each composed
of two sister chromatids held together at their centromeres
(see Fig. 4.16e). Nonsister chromatids that have undergone
crossing-over remain closely associated at chiasmata. The
end of diakinesis is analogous to the prometaphase of mitosis: The nuclear envelope breaks down, and the microtubules of the spindle apparatus begin to form.
Metaphase I: Paired homologs attach  
to spindle fibers from opposite poles
During mitosis, each sister chromatid has a kinetochore
that becomes attached to microtubules emanating from opposite spindle poles. During meiosis I, the situation is different. The kinetochores of sister chromatids fuse, so that
each chromosome contains only a single functional kinetochore. During metaphase I (see Fig. 4.15, meiosis I), it is the
kinetochores of homologous chromosomes that attach to microtubules from opposite spindle poles. As a result, in chromosomes aligned at the metaphase plate, the kinetochores of
maternally and paternally derived chromosomes are subject
to pulling forces from opposite spindle poles, balanced by the
physical connections between homologs at chiasmata. Each
bivalent’s alignment and hookup is independent of that of
every other bivalent, so the chromosomes facing each pole
are a random mix of maternal and paternal origin.
Anaphase I: Homologs move to  
opposite spindle poles
At the onset of anaphase I, the chiasmata joining homologous chromosomes dissolve, which allows the maternal
and paternal homologs to begin to move toward opposite
spindle poles (see Fig. 4.15, meiosis I). Note that in anaphase of the first meiotic division, the sister centromeres
do not separate as they do in mitosis. Thus, from each homologous pair, one chromosome consisting of two sister
chromatids joined at their centromeres segregates to each
spindle pole.
Recombination through crossing-over plays an important role in the proper segregation of homologous chromosomes during the first meiotic division. The chiasmata hold
the homologs together and thus ensure that their kinetochores remain attached to opposite spindle poles throughout metaphase. When recombination does not occur within
a bivalent, mistakes in hookup and conveyance may cause
homologous chromosomes to move to the same pole, instead of segregating to opposite poles. In some organisms,
however, proper segregation of nonrecombinant chromosomes nonetheless occurs through other pairing mechanisms. Investigators do not yet completely understand the
nature of these processes, and they are currently evaluating
several models to explain them.
Telophase I: Nuclear envelopes re-form
The telophase of the first meiotic division, or telophase I,
takes place when nuclear membranes begin to form around
the chromosomes that have moved to the poles. Each of the
incipient daughter nuclei contains one-half the number of
chromosomes in the original parent nucleus, but each chromosome consists of two sister chromatids joined at their
centromeres (see Fig. 4.15, meiosis I). Because the number
of chromosomes is reduced to one-half the normal diploid
number, meiosis I is often called a reductional division.
In most species, cytokinesis follows telophase I, with
daughter nuclei becoming enclosed in separate daughter
cells. A short interphase then ensues. During this time, the
chromosomes usually decondense, in which case they must
recondense during the prophase of the subsequent second
meiotic division. In some species, however, the chromosomes simply stay condensed. Most importantly, no S
phase exists during the interphase between meiosis I and
meiosis II; that is, the chromosomes do not replicate during
meiotic interphase. The relatively brief interphase between
meiosis I and meiosis II is known as interkinesis.
During Meiosis II, Sister Chromatids
Separate to Produce Haploid Gametes
The second meiotic division (meiosis II) proceeds in a fashion very similar to that of mitosis, but because the number
of chromosomes in each dividing nucleus has already been
reduced by half, the resulting daughter cells are haploid.
The same process occurs in each of the two daughter cells
generated by meiosis I, producing four haploid cells at the
end of this second meiotic round (see Fig. 4.15, meiosis II).
Prophase II: The chromosomes condense
If the chromosomes decondensed during the preceding interphase, they recondense during prophase II. At the end
of prophase II, the nuclear envelope breaks down, and the
spindle apparatus re-forms.
Metaphase II: Chromosomes align  
at the metaphase plate
The kinetochores of sister chromatids attach to microtubule
fibers emanating from opposite poles of the spindle apparatus, just as in mitotic metaphase. Nonetheless, two significant features of metaphase II distinguish it from
mitosis. First, the number of chromosomes is one-half that
in mitotic metaphase of the same species. Second, in most
chromosomes, the two sister chromatids are no longer
strictly identical because of the recombination through
crossing-over that occurred during meiosis I. The sister
chromatids still contain the same genes, but they may carry
different combinations of alleles.
Anaphase II: Sister chromatids move  
to opposite spindle poles
Just as in mitosis, severing of the connection between sister
centromeres allows the sister chromatids to move toward
opposite spindle poles during anaphase II.
Telophase II: Nuclear membranes  
re-form, and cytokinesis follows
Membranes form around each of four daughter nuclei in
telophase II, and cytokinesis places each nucleus in a separate cell. The result is four haploid gametes. Note that
at the end of meiosis II, each daughter cell (that is, each
gamete) has the same number of chromosomes as the parental cell present at the beginning of this division. For
this reason, meiosis II is termed an equational division.
Mistakes in Meiosis Produce
Defective Gametes
Segregational errors during either meiotic division can
lead to aberrations, such as trisomies, in the next generation. If, for example, the homologs of a chromosome pair
do not segregate during meiosis I (a mistake known as nondisjunction), they may travel together to the same pole and
eventually become part of the same gamete. Such an error
may at fertilization result in any one of a large variety of
possible trisomies. Most autosomal trisomies in humans,
as we already mentioned, are lethal in utero; one exception
is trisomy 21, the genetic basis of Down syndrome. Like
trisomy 21, extra sex chromosomes may also be viable but
cause a variety of mental and physical abnormalities, such
as those seen in Klinefelter syndrome (see Table 4.1).
Meiosis Contributes to Genetic Diversity
The wider the assortment of different gene combinations
among members of a species, the greater the chance that at
least some individuals will carry combinations of alleles
that allow survival in a changing environment. Two aspects
of meiosis contribute to genetic diversity in a population.
First, because only chance governs which paternal or maternal homologs migrate to the two poles during the first
meiotic division, different gametes carry a different mix of
maternal and paternal chromosomes. Figure 4.17a shows
how different patterns of homolog migration produce different mixes of parental chromosomes in the gametes. The
amount of potential variation generated by this random
independent assortment increases with the number of
chromosomes. In Ascaris, for example, where n = 2
(the chromosome complement shown in Fig. 4.17a),
the random assortment of homologs could produce only
22, or four types of gametes. In a human being, however,
where n = 23, this mechanism alone could generate 223, or
more than 8 million genetically different kinds of gametes.
A second feature of meiosis, the reshuffling of genetic
information through crossing-over during prophase I,
ensures an even greater amount of genetic diversity in gametes. Because crossing-over recombines maternally and paternally derived genes, each chromosome in each different
gamete could consist of different combinations of maternal
and paternal alleles (Fig. 4.17b).
Of course, sexual reproduction adds yet another means
of producing genetic diversity. At fertilization, any one of a
vast number of genetically diverse sperm can fertilize an egg
with its own distinctive genetic constitution. It is thus not
very surprising that, with the exception of identical twins,
the 6 billion people in the world are each genetically unique.
Figure 4.17 How meiosis contributes to genetic diversity.
(a) The variation resulting from the independent assortment of
nonhomologous chromosomes increases with the number of
chromosomes in the genome. (b) Crossing-over between
homologous chromosomes ensures that each gamete is unique.
Metaphase II
Metaphase I
Metaphase I
Metaphase II
Telophase I
Telophase II
Gametes
Prophase I
Meiosis II
Meiosis I
Orientation I Orientation II
(a) Independent assortment (b) Recombination
Mitosis and Meiosis: A Comparison
Mitosis occurs in all types of eukaryotic cells (that is, cells
with a membrane-bounded nucleus) and is a conservative
mechanism that preserves the genetic status quo. Mitosis
followed by cytokinesis produces growth by increasing the
number of cells. It also promotes the continual replacement
of roots, stems, and leaves in plants and the regeneration of
blood cells, intestinal tissues, and skin in animals.
Meiosis, on the other hand, occurs only in sexually
reproducing organisms, in just a few specialized germ
cells within the reproductive organs that produce haploid
gametes. It is not a conservative mechanism; rather, the
extensive combinatorial changes arising from meiosis are
one source of the genetic variation that fuels evolution.
Table 4.3 illustrates the significant contrasts between the
two mechanisms of cell division.
 In meiosis, chromosomes replicate once (before meiosis I),
but the nucleus divides twice (meiosis I and II).
•	 During metaphase I, homologous chromosomes connect
to opposite spindle poles. The independent alignment of
each pair of homologs ensures the independent
assortment of genes carried on different chromosomes.
•	 Crossing-over during the first meiotic division maintains
the connection between homologous chromosomes until
anaphase I and contributes to the genetic diversity of
gametes.
•	 Sister chromatids separate from each other during
meiosis II so that gametes have only one copy of each
chromosome.
•	 Fertilization—the union of egg and sperm—restores the
diploid number of chromosomes (2n) to the zygote.
•	 Errors during meiosis may produce gametes with
missing or extra chromosomes, which often is lethal
to offspring
Gametogenesis
learning objectives
1. Compare the processes of oogenesis and
spermatogenesis in humans.
2. Distinguish between the sex chromosome complements
of human female and male germ-line cells at different
stages of gametogenesis
In all sexually reproducing animals, the embryonic germ
cells (collectively known as the germ line) undergo a series of mitotic divisions that yield a collection of specialized diploid cells, which subsequently divide by meiosis to
produce haploid cells. As with other biological processes,
many variations on this general pattern have been observed. In some species, the haploid cells resulting from
meiosis are the gametes themselves, while in other species, those cells must undergo a specific plan of differentiation to fulfill that function. Moreover, in certain
organisms, the four haploid products of a single meiosis
do not all become gametes. Gamete formation, or gametogenesis, thus gives rise to haploid gametes marked not
only by the events of meiosis per se but also by cellular
events that precede and follow meiosis. Here we illustrate
gametogenesis with a description of egg and sperm formation in humans. The details of gamete formation in several
other organisms appear throughout the book in discussions of specific experimental studies.
Haploid and diploid cells can undergo mitosis
One round of division
Mitosis is preceded by S phase
(chromosome duplication).
Chromosomes duplicate
prior to meiosis I but not
before meiosis II.
Occurs in germ cells as part of the sexual cycle
Two rounds of division, meiosis I and meiosis II
Only diploid cells undergo meiosis
Interkinesis Gamete
formation
G1 S G2
Meiosis II
2n
2n
2n
2n
n
n
n
n
Mitosis Meiosis I Meiosis II
Mitosis produces two new daughter cells, identical
to each other and the original cell. Mitosis is thus
genetically conservative.
Meiosis produces four haploid cells, one (egg) or all (sperm)
of which can become gametes. None of these is identical to
each other or to the original cell, because meiosis results in
combinatorial change.
During prophase of meiosis I, homologous
chromosomes pair (synapse) along their
length.
Crossing-over occurs between homologous
chromosomes during prophase of meiosis I.
Homologous chromosomes (not sister
chromatids) attach to spindle fibers from
opposite poles during metaphase I.
The centromeres of the sister chromatids
remain tightly attached during meiosis I.
Sister chromatids attach to spindle fibers
from opposite poles during metaphase II.
The centromeres of the sister chromatids
separate at the beginning of anaphase II.
Homologous chromosomes
do not pair.
Genetic exchange between
homologous chromosomes
is very rare.
Sister chromatids attach to
spindle fibers from opposite
poles during metaphase.
The centromeres of the sister
chromatids separate at the
beginning of anaphase.
Figure 4.18 In humans, egg formation begins in the fetal ovaries and arrests during the prophase of meiosis I. Fetal
ovaries contain about 500,000 primary oocytes arrested in the diplotene substage of meiosis I. If the egg released during a menstrual
cycle is fertilized, meiosis is completed. Only one of the three cells produced by meiosis serves as the functional gamete, or ovum.
Arrest at diplotene of meiosis I.
Oocyte grows and accumulates
nutrients.
Mitosis (occurs in fetal ovary) Meiosis I: Asymmetrical division
(completed at ovulation)
Meiosis II: Asymmetrical division
(completed only after fertilization)
Oogonia
Arrested
primary
oocyte
Secondary oocyte
First
polar body
Second
polar body
Mature ovum
Ovarian
ligament Primary oocyte
within primary
follicle
1.
2. Developing
follicle with
primary oocyte
3. Mature follicle
with secondary
oocyte
4. Ruptured follicle
5. Released
secondary oocyte
Oogenesis in Humans Produces One
Ovum from Each Primary Oocyte
The end product of egg formation in humans is a large,
nutrient-rich ovum whose stored resources can sustain the
early embryo. The process, known as oogenesis (Fig. 4.18),
begins when diploid germ cells in the ovary, called oogonia
(singular, oogonium), multiply rapidly by mitosis and
produce a large number of primary oocytes, which then
undergo meiosis.
For each primary oocyte, meiosis I results in the formation of two daughter cells that differ in size, so this division is asymmetric. The larger of these cells, the secondary
oocyte, receives over 95% of the cytoplasm. The other
small sister cell is known as the first polar body. During
meiosis II, the secondary oocyte undergoes another asymmetrical division to produce a large haploid ovum and a
small, haploid second polar body. The first polar body 
usually arrests its development. The two small polar bodies
apparently serve no function and disintegrate, leaving one
large haploid ovum as the functional gamete. Thus, only
one of the three (or rarely, four) products of a single meiosis
serves as a female gamete. A normal human ovum carries
22 autosomes and an X sex chromosome.
Oogenesis begins in the fetus. By six months after conception, the fetal ovaries are fully formed and contain about
half a million primary oocytes arrested in the diplotene substage of prophase I. These cells, with their homologous chromosomes locked in synapsis, were thought for decades to be
the only oocytes the female will produce. If so, a girl is born
with all the oocytes she will ever possess. Remarkably, recent
research has brought this long-held theory into question.
Scientists have shown that germ-line precursor cells removed
from adult ovaries can produce new eggs in a petri dish.
However, it is not yet known whether these eggs are viable
nor if these germ-line cells normally produce eggs in adults.
From the onset of puberty at about age 12, until menopause some 35–40 years later, most women release one primary oocyte each month (from alternate ovaries), amounting
to roughly 480 oocytes released during the reproductive
years. The remaining primary oocytes disintegrate during
menopause. At ovulation, a released oocyte completes meiosis I and proceeds as far as the metaphase of meiosis II. If
the oocyte is then fertilized, that is, penetrated by a sperm
nucleus, it quickly completes meiosis II. The nuclear membranes of the sperm and ovum dissolve, allowing their chromosomes to form the single diploid nucleus of the zygote,
and the zygote divides by mitosis to produce a functional
embryo. In contrast, unfertilized oocytes exit the body during the menses stage of the menstrual cycle.
The long interval before completion of meiosis in oocytes released by women in their 30s, 40s, and 50s may
contribute to the observed correlation between maternal  age and meiotic segregational errors, including those that
produce trisomies. Women in their mid-20s, for example,
run a very small risk of trisomy 21; only 0.05% of children
born to women of this age have Down syndrome. During
the later childbearing years, however, the risk rises rapidly;
at age 35, it is 0.9% of live births, and at age 45, it is 3%.
You would not expect this age-related increase in risk if
meiosis were completed before the mother’s birth.
Spermatogenesis in Humans
Produces Four Sperm from Each
Primary Spermatocyte
The production of sperm, or spermatogenesis (Fig. 4.19),
begins in the male testes in germ cells known as
spermatogonia. Mitotic divisions of the spermatogonia produce many diploid cells, the primary spermatocytes.
Unlike primary oocytes, primary spermatocytes undergo a
symmetrical meiosis I, producing two secondary spermatocytes, each of which undergoes a symmetrical meiosis II. At the conclusion of meiosis, each original primary
spermatocyte thus yields four equivalent haploid spermatids.
These spermatids then mature by developing a characteristic
whiplike tail and by concentrating all their chromosomal material in a head, thereby becoming functional sperm. A human
sperm, much smaller than the ovum it will fertilize, contains
22 autosomes and either an X or a Y sex chromosome.
The timing of sperm production differs radically from
that of egg formation. The meiotic divisions allowing conversion of primary spermatocytes to spermatids begin only
at puberty, but meiosis then continues throughout a man’s
life. The entire process of spermatogenesis takes about
48–60 days: 16–20 for meiosis I, 16–20 for meiosis II, and
16–20 for the maturation of spermatids into fully functional
sperm. Within each testis after puberty, millions of sperm
are always in production, and a single ejaculate can contain
up to 300 million. Over a lifetime, a man can produce billions of sperm, almost equally divided between those bearing an X and those bearing a Y chromosome.
essential concepts
•	 Diploid germ cell precursors proliferate by mitosis and
then undergo meiosis to produce haploid gametes.
•	 Human females are born with oocytes arrested in
prophase of meiosis I. Meiosis resumes at ovulation
but is not completed until fertilization. Spermatogenesis
begins at puberty and continues through the lifetimes
of human males.
•	 The two meiotic divisions of oogenesis are asymmetrical,
so a primary oocyte results in a single egg. The two
meiotic divisions of spermatogenesis are symmetrical, so
a primary spermatocyte results in four sperm.
•	 All human oocytes contain a single X chromosome;
human sperm contain either an X or a Y.
Figure 4.19 Human sperm form continuously in the testes after puberty. Spermatogonia are located near the exterior of
seminiferous tubules in a human testis. Once they divide to produce the primary spermatocytes, the subsequent stages of spermatogenesis—
meiotic divisions in the spermatocytes and maturation of spermatids into sperm—occur successively closer to the middle of the tubule.
Mature sperm are released into the central lumen of the tubule for ejaculation.
Spermatogonia
Spermatogonia
Primary
spermatocyte
Secondary
spermatocyte
Primary spermatocyte
(after chromosome
duplication)
Secondary
spermatocyte
Sperm
Spermatid
Spermatids Sperm
Mitosis (occurs in adult testis) Meiosis I Meiosis II Dierentiation
Validation of the
Chromosome Theory
learning objectives
1. Describe the key events of meiosis that explain
Mendel’s first and second laws.
2. Infer from the results of crosses whether or not a trait
is sex-linked.
3. Predict phenotypes associated with nondisjunction
of sex chromosomes.
We have presented thus far two circumstantial lines of
evidence in support of the chromosome theory of inheritance. First, the phenotype of sexual morphology is associated with the inheritance of particular chromosomes.
Second, the events of mitosis, meiosis, and gametogenesis ensure a constant number of chromosomes in the somatic cells of all members of a species over time; one
would expect the genetic material to exhibit this kind of
stability even in organisms with very different modes of
reproduction. Final acceptance of the chromosome theory depended on researchers going beyond the circumstantial evidence to a rigorous demonstration of two key
points: (1) that the inheritance of genes corresponds with
the inheritance of chromosomes in every detail, and (2)
that the transmission of particular chromosomes coincides with the transmission of specific traits other than
sex determination.
Mendel’s Laws Correlate with
Chromosome Behavior During Meiosis
Walter Sutton first outlined the chromosome theory of inheritance in 1902–1903, building on the theoretical ideas
and experimental results of Theodor Boveri in Germany,
E. B. Wilson in New York, and others. In a 1902 paper,
Sutton speculated that “the association of paternal and maternal chromosomes in pairs and their subsequent separation during the reducing division (that is, meiosis I) . . .
may constitute the physical basis of the Mendelian law of
heredity.” In 1903, he suggested that chromosomes carry
Mendel’s hereditary units for the following reasons:
1. Every cell contains two copies of each kind of chromosome, and two copies of each kind of gene.
2. The chromosome complement, like Mendel’s genes,
appears unchanged as it is transmitted from parents to
offspring through generations.
3. During meiosis, homologous chromosomes pair and
then separate to different gametes, just as the alternative
alleles of each gene segregate to different gametes.
4. Maternal and paternal copies of each chromosome
pair move to opposite spindle poles without regard to
the assortment of any other homologous chromosome
pair, just as the alternative alleles of unrelated genes
assort independently.
5. At fertilization, an egg’s set of chromosomes unites
with a randomly encountered sperm’s set of chromosomes, just as alleles obtained from one parent unite
at random with those from the other parent.
6. In all cells derived from the fertilized egg, one-half
of the chromosomes and one-half of the genes are
of maternal origin, the other half of paternal origin.
The two parts of Table 4.4 show the intimate relationship
between the chromosome theory of inheritance and Mendel’s laws of segregation and independent assortment. If Mendel’s genes for pea shape and pea color are
assigned to different (that is, nonhomologous) chromosomes, the behavior of chromosomes can be seen to parallel the behavior of genes. Walter Sutton’s observation of
these parallels led him to propose that chromosomes and
genes are physically connected in some manner. Meiosis
ensures that each gamete will contain only a single chromatid of a bivalent and thus only a single allele of any
gene on that chromatid (Table 4.4a). The independent behavior of two bivalents during meiosis means that the genes
carried on different chromosomes will assort into gametes
independently (Table 4.4b).
From a review of Fig. 4.17a, which follows two different chromosome pairs through the process of meiosis,
you might wonder whether crossing-over abolishes the
clear correspondence between Mendel’s laws and the
movement of chromosomes. The answer is no. Each chromatid of a homologous chromosome pair contains only
one copy of a given gene, and only one chromatid from
each pair of homologs is incorporated into each gamete.
Because alternative alleles remain on different chromatids even after crossing-over has occurred, alternative alleles still segregate to different gametes as demanded by
Mendel’s first law.
Furthermore, because the orientations of nonhomologous chromosomes are completely random with respect to
each other during both meiotic divisions, the genes on different chromosomes assort independently even if crossing-over
occurs, as demanded by Mendel’s second law. In Fig. 4.17a,
you can see that without recombination, each of the two
random alignments of the nonhomologous chromosomes
results in the production of only two of the four gamete
types: AB and ab for one orientation, and Ab and aB for the
other orientation. With recombination, each of the alignments of alleles in Fig. 4.17a may in fact generate all four
gamete types. (Imagine a crossover switching the positions of A and a nonsister chromatids in Fig. 4.17a). Thus,
both the random alignment of nonhomologous chromosomes and crossing-over contribute to the phenomenon of
independent assortment.
Specific Traits Are Transmitted
with Specific Chromosomes
The fate of a theory depends on whether its predictions
can be validated. Because genes determine traits, the prediction that chromosomes carry genes could be tested by
breeding experiments that would show whether transmission of a specific chromosome coincides with transmission of a specific trait. Cytologists knew that one pair of
chromosomes, the sex chromosomes, determines whether
an individual is male or female. Would similar correlations exist for other traits?
TABLE 4.4 How the Chromosome Theory of Inheritance Explains Mendel’s Laws
The Law of Segregation (b) The Law of Independent Assortment
F1
RR Rr
Meiosis I
Anaphase
Possible
gametes
Meiosis II
Round (R) Wrinkled (r )
R r
R R rr
R r
R r
Rr rr
Y R
Y R
Y r
y R
y r
Y r y R y r
F2
YY RR YY Rr
YY Rr YY rr
Yy RR Yy Rr
Yy Rr Yy rr
Yy RR Yy Rr yy RR yy Rr
Yy Rr Yy rr yy rR yy rr
Possible
gametes
F1 Homologous pair
for seed color
Homologous pair
for seed shape
(Y) Yellow
(y) Green
Round (R)
Wrinkled (r)
(Y R) (y r)
Yellow
round
Green
wrinkled
(Y r)
Yellow
wrinkled
(y R)
Green
round
Meiosis I
Anaphase
Meiosis II
OR
R R
Y Y Y Y
r r R R r r
y y y y
TABLE 4.4 How the Chromosome Theory of Inheritance Explains Mendel’s Laws
(a) The Law of Segregation (b) The Law of Independent Assortment
In an F1 hybrid plant, the allele for round peas (R) is found on
one chromosome, and the allele for wrinkled peas (r) is on the
homologous chromosome. The pairing between the two
homologous chromosomes during prophase through
metaphase of meiosis I makes sure that the homologs will
separate to opposite spindle poles during anaphase I. At the
end of meiosis II, two types of gametes have been produced:
half have R, and half have r, but no gametes have both alleles.
Thus, the separation of homologous chromosomes at meiosis I
corresponds to the segregation of alleles. As the Punnett
square shows, fertilization of 50% R and 50% r eggs with the
same proportion of R and r sperm leads to Mendel’s 3:1 ratio in
the F2 generation.
One pair of homologous chromosomes carries the gene for
seed shape (alleles R and r). A second pair of homologous
chromosomes carries the gene for seed color (alleles Y and y).
Each homologous pair aligns at random at the metaphase plate
during meiosis I, independently of the other homologous pair.
Thus, two equally likely configurations are possible for the
migration of any two chromosome pairs toward the poles
during anaphase I. As a result, a dihybrid individual will
generate four equally likely types of gametes with regard to
the two traits in question. The Punnett square affirms that
independent assortment of traits carried by nonhomologous
chromosomes produces Mendel’s 9:3:3:1 ratio.
A gene determining eye color  
on the Drosophila X chromosome
Thomas Hunt Morgan, an American experimental biologist with training in embryology, headed the research group
whose findings eventually established a firm experimental
base for the chromosome theory. Morgan chose to work
with the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster because it is
extremely prolific and has a very short generation time,
taking only 12 days to develop from a fertilized egg into a
mature adult capable of producing hundreds of offspring.
Morgan fed his flies mashed bananas and housed them in
empty milk bottles capped with wads of cotton.
In 1910, a white-eyed male appeared among a large
group of flies with brick-red eyes. A mutation had apparently altered a gene determining eye color, changing it from
the normal wild-type allele specifying red to a new allele
that produced white. When Morgan allowed the white-eyed
male to mate with its red-eyed sisters, all the flies of the F1
generation had red eyes; the red allele was clearly dominant
to the white (Fig. 4.20, cross A).
Establishing a pattern of nomenclature for Drosophila
geneticists, Morgan named the gene identified by the abnormal white eye color the white gene, for the mutation that
revealed its existence. The normal wild-type allele of the white
gene, abbreviated w+, is for brick-red eyes, while the counterpart mutant w allele results in white eye color. The
superscript + signifies the wild type. By writing the gene
name and abbreviation in lowercase, Morgan symbolized
that the mutant w allele is recessive to the wild-type w+. (If
a Drosophila mutation results in a dominant non-wild-type
phenotype, the first letter of the gene name or of its abbreviation is capitalized; thus the mutation known as Bar eyes
is dominant to the wild-type Bar+ allele. (See the Appendix
Guidelines for Gene Nomenclature.)
Morgan then crossed the red-eyed males of the F1 generation with their red-eyed sisters (Fig. 4.20, cross B) and
obtained an F2 generation with the predicted 3:1 ratio of
red to white eyes. But there was something askew in the
pattern: Among the red-eyed offspring, there were two females for every one male, and all the white-eyed offspring
were males. This result was surprisingly different from
the equal transmission to both sexes of the Mendelian
traits discussed in Chapters 2 and 3. In these fruit flies,
the ratio of eye colors was not the same in male and
female progeny.
By mating F2 red-eyed females with their white-eyed
brothers (Fig. 4.20, cross C), Morgan obtained some females with white eyes, which then allowed him to mate a
white-eyed female with a red-eyed wild-type male (Fig. 4.20,
cross D). The result was exclusively red-eyed daughters
and white-eyed sons. The pattern seen in cross D is known
as crisscross inheritance because the males inherit their
eye color from their mothers, while the daughters inherit
their eye color from their fathers. Note in Fig. 4.20 that the results of the reciprocal crosses red female × white male
(cross A) and white female × red male (cross D) are not
identical, again in contrast with Mendel’s findings.
From the data, Morgan reasoned that the white gene for
eye color is X-linked, that is, carried by the X chromosome. (Note that while symbols for genes and alleles are
italicized, symbols for chromosomes are not.) The Y chromosome carries no allele of this gene for eye color. Males,
therefore, have only one copy of the gene, which they inherit from their mother along with their only X chromosome; their Y chromosome must come from their father.
Thus, males are hemizygous for this eye color gene, because their diploid cells have half the number of alleles
carried by the female on her two X chromosomes.
If the single white gene on the X chromosome of a
male is the wild-type w+ allele, he will have red eyes and a
genotype that can be written Xw+Y. [Here we designate the
chromosome (X or Y) together with the allele it carries, to
emphasize that certain genes are X-linked.] In contrast to
an Xw+Y male, a hemizygous XwY male would have white
eyes. Females with two X chromosomes can be one of
three genotypes: Xw Xw (white-eyed), XwXw+ (red-eyed
because w+ is dominant to w), or Xw+Xw+ (red-eyed). As shown in Fig. 4.20, Morgan’s assumption that the gene for
eye color is X-linked explains the results of his breeding
experiments. Crisscross inheritance, for example, occurs
because the only X chromosome in sons of a white-eyed
mother (XwXw) must carry the w allele, so the sons will be
white-eyed. In contrast, because daughters of a red-eyed
(Xw+Y) father must receive a w+-bearing X chromosome
from their father, they should all have red eyes.
Validation of the chromosome theory from  
the analysis of nondisjunction
Although Morgan’s work strongly supported the hypothesis that the gene for eye color lies on the X chromosome, he
himself continued to question the validity of the chromosome theory until Calvin Bridges, one of his top students,
found another key piece of evidence. Bridges repeated the
cross Morgan had performed between white-eyed females
and red-eyed males, but this time he did the experiment on
a larger scale. As expected, the progeny of this cross consisted mostly of red-eyed females and white-eyed males.
However, about 1 in every 2000 males had red eyes, and
about the same small fraction of females had white eyes.
Figure 4.20 A Drosophila eye color gene is located on the X chromosome. X-linkage explains the inheritance of alleles of
the white gene in this series of crosses performed by Thomas Hunt Morgan. The progeny of crosses A, B, and C outlined with green dotted
boxes are those used as the parents in the next cross of the series.
Cross C
Cross A
Cross D
Cross B
X X w+ w Xw Y
w+ w
X X Xw Xw Xw+ Y Xw Y
All progeny red-eyed
w
X X w+ w+ X Y
w+ w
X X Xw+ Y
3 red 1 white
w+ w+
X X X X w+ w Xw+ Y Xw Y
w+
Xw+ Xw X Y
w+
Xw Xw X Y
w+ w
X X
w
X Y
Crisscross inheritance
Validation of the chromosome theory from  
the analysis of nondisjunction
Although Morgan’s work strongly supported the hypothesis that the gene for eye color lies on the X chromosome, he
himself continued to question the validity of the chromosome theory until Calvin Bridges, one of his top students,
found another key piece of evidence. Bridges repeated the
cross Morgan had performed between white-eyed females
and red-eyed males, but this time he did the experiment on
a larger scale. As expected, the progeny of this cross consisted mostly of red-eyed females and white-eyed males.
However, about 1 in every 2000 males had red eyes, and
about the same small fraction of females had white eyes.
Figure 4.21 Nondisjunction: Rare mistakes in meiosis help confirm the chromosome theory. (a) Rare events of nondisjunction
in an XX female produce XX and O eggs. The results of normal disjunction in the female are not shown. XO males are sterile because the
missing Y chromosome is needed for male fertility in Drosophila. (b) In an XXY female, the three sex chromosomes can pair and segregate
in two ways, producing progeny with unusual sex chromosome complements.
w+
(a) Nondisjunction in an XX female (b) Segregation in an XXY female
White-eyed
Y
Red-eyed
White-eyed Red-eyed
Meiosis
Y
O
P
Gametes
Nondisjunction
Normal
segregation
Y
O
w w
red Xw+
dies white
O Y
dies
Y
wY
w
Y
Less
frequent
More
frequent
white
w+
w+
w+
w w
Gametes w w w w w+
Y Y Y
w w w+
Y Y
Meiosis
X Y YY
red
red white
dies white
red dies
Bridges hypothesized that these exceptions arose
through rare events in which the X chromosomes fail to
separate during meiosis in females. He called such failures
in chromosome segregation nondisjunction. Mistakes leading to nondisjunction can occur during either meiosis I or
meiosis II, but in either case nondisjunction would result in
some eggs with two X chromosomes and others with none.
As Fig. 4.21a shows, fertilization of these chromosomally
abnormal eggs could produce four types of zygotes: XXY
(with two X chromosomes from the egg and a Y from the
sperm), XXX (with two Xs from the egg and one X from
the sperm), XO (with the lone sex chromosome from the
sperm and no sex chromosome from the egg), and OY (with
the only sex chromosome again coming from the sperm).
When Bridges examined the sex chromosomes of the
rare white-eyed females produced in his large-scale cross, he
found that they were indeed XXY individuals who must
have received two X chromosomes and with them two w alleles from their white-eyed XwXw mothers. The exceptional
red-eyed males emerging from the cross were XO; their eye
color showed that they must have obtained their sole sex
chromosome from their Xw+Y fathers. In this study then,
transmission of the white gene alleles followed the predicted behavior of X chromosomes during rare meiotic mistakes,
indicating that the X chromosome carries the gene for eye
color. These results also suggested that zygotes with the two
other abnormal sex chromosome karyotypes expected from
nondisjunction in females (XXX and OY) die during embryonic development and thus produce no progeny.
Because XXY white-eyed females have three sex chromosomes rather than the normal two, Bridges reasoned
they would produce four kinds of eggs: XY and X, or XX
and Y (Fig. 4.21b). You can visualize the formation of
these four kinds of eggs by imagining that when the three
chromosomes pair and disjoin during meiosis, two chromosomes must go to one pole and one chromosome to the
other. With this kind of segregation, only two results are
possible: Either one X and the Y go to one pole and the
second X to the other (yielding XY and X gametes), or the
two Xs go to one pole and the Y to the other (yielding XX
and Y gametes). The first of these two scenarios occurs
more often because it comes about when the two similar X
chromosomes pair with each other, ensuring that they will
go to opposite poles during the first meiotic division. The
second, less likely possibility happens only if the two
X chromosomes fail to pair with each other
Bridges next predicted that fertilization of these four
kinds of eggs from an XXY female by normal sperm would
generate an array of sex chromosome karyotypes associated with specific eye colors in the progeny. Bridges verified all his predictions when he analyzed the eye colors and
sex chromosomes of a large number of offspring. For instance, he showed cytologically that all of the white-eyed
females emerging from the cross in Fig. 4.21b had two X
chromosomes and one Y chromosome, while one-half of
the white-eyed males had a single X chromosome and two
Y chromosomes. Bridges’ painstaking observations provided compelling evidence that specific genes do in fact
reside on specific chromosomes.
The Chromosome Theory Integrates
Many Aspects of Gene Behavior
Mendel had assumed that genes are located in cells. The
chromosome theory assigned the genes to a specific kind of
structure within cells and explained alternative alleles as
physically matching parts of homologous chromosomes. In
so doing, the theory provided an explanation of Mendel’s
laws. The mechanism of meiosis ensures that the matching
parts of homologous chromosomes will segregate to different gametes (except in rare instances of nondisjunction),
accounting for the segregation of alleles predicted by Mendel’s first law. Because each homologous chromosome pair
aligns independently of all others at meiosis I, genes carried on different chromosomes will assort independently,
as predicted by Mendel’s second law.
The chromosome theory is also able to explain the creation of new alleles through mutation, a spontaneous
change in a particular gene (that is, in a particular part of a
chromosome). If a mutation occurs in the germ line, it can
be transmitted to subsequent generations.
Finally, through mitotic cell divisions in the embryo
and after birth, each cell in a multicellular organism receives the same chromosomes—and thus the same maternal and paternal alleles of each gene—as the zygote
received from the egg and sperm at fertilization. In this
way, an individual’s genome—the chromosomes and genes
he or she carries—remains constant throughout life.
essential concepts
•	 Segregation of homologous chromosomes into daughter
cells at meiosis I explains Mendel’s first law.
•	 Independent alignment of homologs with respect to each
other and crossing-over of nonsister chromatids during
meiosis I explain Mendel’s second law.
•	 In organisms with XX/XY sex determination, males are
hemizygous for X-linked genes, while females have two
copies.
Sex-Linked and Sexually
Dimorphic Traits in Humans
learning objectives
1. Determine from pedigree analysis whether human traits
are X-linked or autosomal.
2. Explain how human cells compensate for the X-linked
gene dosage difference in XX and XY nuclei
A person unable to tell red from green would find it nearly
impossible to distinguish the rose, scarlet, and magenta in
the flowers of a garden bouquet from the delicately variegated greens in their foliage, or to complete a complex
electrical circuit by fastening red-clad metallic wires to red
ones and green to green. Such a person has most likely inherited some form of red-green color blindness, a recessive
condition that runs in families and affects mostly males.
Among Caucasians in North America and Europe, 8%
of men but only 0.44% of women have this vision defect.
Figure 4.22 suggests to readers with normal color vision
what people with red-green color blindness actually see.
In 1911, E. B. Wilson, a contributor to the chromosome theory of inheritance, combined family studies of the
inheritance of color blindness with recent knowledge of the
roles of the X and Y chromosomes in sex determination to
make the first assignment of a human gene to a particular
chromosome. The gene for red-green color blindness, he
said, lies on the X because the condition usually passes
from a maternal grandfather through an unaffected carrier
mother to roughly 50% of the grandsons.
Several years after Wilson made this gene assignment,
pedigree analysis established that various forms of hemophilia, or bleeders disease (in which the blood fails to clot
properly), also result from mutations on the X chromosome
that give rise to a relatively rare, recessive trait. In this context, rare means infrequent in the population. The family
histories under review, including one following the descendants of Queen Victoria of England (Fig. 4.23a),
showed that relatively rare X-linked traits appear more often in males than in females and often skip generations.
The clues that suggest X-linked recessive inheritance in a
pedigree are summarized in Table 4.5.
Unlike color blindness and hemophilia, some—although
very few—of the known rare mutations on the X chromosome are dominant to the wild-type allele. With such
dominant X-linked mutations, more females than males show
the aberrant phenotype. This phenomenon occurs because all
the daughters of an affected male but none of the sons will
have the condition, while one-half the sons and one-half the
daughters of an affected female will receive the dominant
allele and therefore show the phenotype (see Table 4.5).
Figure 4.22 Red-green color blindness is an X-linked recessive trait in humans. How the world looks to a person with either
normal color vision (a) or a kind of red-green color blindness known as deuteranopia (b).
(both): Color deficit simulation courtesy of Vischeck (www.vischeck.com). Source image courtesy of NASA
Figure 4.23 X-linked traits may be recessive or dominant.
(a) Pedigree showing inheritance of the recessive X-linked trait
hemophilia in Queen Victoria’s family. (b) Pedigree showing the
inheritance of the dominant X-linked trait hypophosphatemia,
commonly referred to as vitamin D–resistant rickets.
Prince Albert
Hemophiliac
Carrier
Edward Alfred Louise Arthur Beatrice Helena
VII
Queen Victoria
Victoria
Alice Louis IV Leopold Helene
Alix Nicholas ll
Alexis Rupert
lI
lII
l
IV
(a) X-linked recessive: Hemophilia
lI
lII
l
(b) X-linked dominant: Hypophosphatemia
Vitamin D–resistant rickets, or hypophosphatemia, is an example of an X-linked dominant trait. Figure 4.23b presents
the pedigree of a family affected by this disease.
In XX Human Females, One X
Chromosome Is Inactivated
The XX and XY system of sex determination presents
human cells with a curious problem that requires a solution called dosage compensation. As mentioned earlier, the X
chromosome contains about 1100 genes, and the proteins
that they specify need to be present in the same amounts in
male and female cells. To compensate for female cells
having two copies of each X-linked gene and male cells
having only one, XX cells inactivate one of their two X
chromosomes. Almost all of the genes on the inactivated
X chromosome are turned off, so no gene products can be
made. X inactivation occurs at about two weeks after fertilization, when an XX human embryo is composed of
only 500–1000 cells. At that time, each cell chooses one X
chromosome at random to condense into a so-called Barr
body and thereby inactivate it. Barr bodies, named after
the cytologist Murray Barr who discovered them, appear
as small, dark chromosomes in interphase cells treated
with a DNA stain that allows chromosomes to be visible
under a light microscope (Fig. 4.24).
Each embryonic cell “decides” independently which
X chromosome will be inactivated—either the X inherited
from the mother or the paternal X. Once the determination
is made, it is clonally perpetuated so that all of the millions of cells descended by mitosis from a particular embryonic cell condense the same X chromosome to a Barr
body (Fig. 4.25a). Human females are thus a patchwork of
cells, some containing a maternally derived active X chromosome, and the others an active paternal X (Fig. 4.25b).
The Fast Forward Box Visualizing X Chromosome Inactivation in Transgenic Mice explains how scientists have
recently developed technology in mice to visualize, both outside and inside the body, the clonal patches of cells that
express the genes on one X chromosome or the other.
The phenomenon of X chromosome inactivation may
have interesting effects on the traits controlled by X-linked
genes. When females are heterozygous at an X-linked gene,
parts of their bodies are in effect hemizygous for one allele,
and parts are hemizygous for the other allele in terms of gene
function. Moreover, which body parts are functionally hemizygous for one allele or the other is random; even identical
twins, who have identical alleles of all of their genes, will have a different pattern of X chromosome inactivation. In
Fig. 4.25b, females heterozygous for the X-linked recessive
trait anhidrotic epidermal dysplasia have patches of skin that
lack sweat glands interspersed with patches of normal skin;
the phenotype of a patch depends upon which X chromosome is inactivated. Each patch is a clone of skin cells derived from a single embryonic cell that made the decision to
inactivate one of the X chromosomes. In a second example,
women heterozygous for an X-linked recessive hemophilia
allele are called carriers of the disease allele, even though
they may have some symptoms of hemophilia. The severity
of the condition depends on the particular random pattern of
cells that inactivated the disease allele and cells that inactivated the normal allele. In Chapter 3, we discussed how
chance events work through genes to affect phenotype; X
inactivation is a perfect example of such an event. 
Recall that the two tips of the X chromosome, the
pseudoautosomal regions (PARs), contain genes also present at the tips of the Y chromosome (Fig. 4.8). In order to
equalize the dosage of these genes in XX and XY cells, the
PAR genes on the Barr body X chromosome escape inactivation. This feature of dosage compensation may explain at
least in part why XXY males (Klinefelter syndrome) and
XO females (Turner syndrome) have abnormal morphological features. Although one of the two X chromosomes in
XXY males becomes a Barr body, Klinefelter males have
three doses (rather than the normal two) of the genes in the
PAR regions. The single X chromosome in XO cells does
not become a Barr body, yet these cells have only one dose
of the PAR genes (rather than two in XX females).
X chromosome inactivation is common to mammals,
and we will present the molecular details of this process in later chapters. It is nonetheless important to realize that
other organisms compensate for sex chromosome differences in alternative ways. Fruit flies, for example, hyperactivate the single X chromosome in XY (male) cells, so that
most X chromosome genes produce twice as much protein
product as each X chromosome in a female. The nematode
C. elegans, in contrast, ratchets down the level of gene activity on each of the X chromosomes in XX hermaphrodites relative to the single X in XO males.
TABLE 4.5 Pedigree Patterns Suggesting
Sex-Linked Inheritance
X-Linked Recessive Trait
1. The trait appears in more males than females because a female
must receive two copies of the rare defective allele to display
the phenotype, whereas a hemizygous male with only one
copy will show it.
2. The mutation will never pass from father to son because sons
receive only a Y chromosome from their father.
3. An affected male passes the X-linked mutation to all his daughters,
who are thus carriers. Each son of these carrier females has a onehalf chance to inherit the defective allele and thus the trait.
4. The trait often skips a generation as the mutation passes from
grandfather through a carrier daughter to grandson.
5. The trait can appear in successive generations when a sister
of an affected male is a carrier. If she is, each of her sons has a
one-half chance of being affected.
6. With the rare affected (homozygous) female, all her sons will
be affected and all her daughters will be carriers.
X-Linked Dominant Trait
1. More females than males show the aberrant trait.
2. The trait is seen in every generation as long as affected males
have female children.
3. All the daughters but none of the sons of an affected male will
be affected. This criterion is the most useful for distinguishing
an X-linked dominant trait from an autosomal dominant trait.
4. The sons and daughters of an affected female each have a
one-half chance of being affected.
5. For incompletely dominant X-linked traits, carrier females may show
the trait in less extreme form than males with the defective allele.
Y-Linked Trait
1. The trait is seen only in males.
2. All male descendants of an affected man will exhibit the trait.
3. Not only do females not exhibit the trait, they also cannot transmit it.
Figure 4.24 Barr bodies are densely staining particles 
in XX cell nuclei. The arrow points to a Barr body in the nucleus
of an XX cell treated with a DNA stain. The Barr body appears
bright white in this negative image. Unlike the other chromosomes,
the Barr body is highly condensed and attached to the nuclear
envelope. XY cells have no Barr bodies.
a-b: From: Hong et al. (17 July 2001), “Identification of an autoimmune serum
containing antibodies against the Barr body,” PNAS, 98(15): 8703-8708,
Fig 1A-B. © 2001 National Academy of Sciences, USA
Figure 4.25 X chromosome dosage compensation 
makes human females a patchwork for X-linked gene 
expression. (a) Early in embryogenesis, each XX cell inactivates
one randomly chosen X chromosome by condensing it into a Barr
body (black oval). The same X chromosome remains a Barr body in
all descendants of each cell. XM = maternal X chromosome; XP =
paternal X chromosome. (b) The twins shown here are heterozygotes
(Dd) for the X-linked recessive condition anhidrotic ectodermal
dysplasia, which prevents sweat gland development. Patches of
skin in blue lack sweat glands because the chromosome with the
wild-type allele (D) is inactivated and the recessive d allele is
nonfunctional.
Perpetuation of X chromosome inactivation after cell divisions
Xp XM
Xp Xp XM XM
Xp
Xp Xp
XM
XM XM
XMXP XMXP
XMXP
(b) X chromosome inactivation results in patchwork females
Visualizing X Chromosome Inactivation in Transgenic Mice
Scientists have recently used molecular techniques and transgenic technology (similar to that described in the earlier Fast
Forward Box Transgenic Mice Prove That SRY Is the Maleness
Factor) to visualize the pattern of X chromosome inactivation in
mice. The researchers generated XX mice containing two different transgenes (in this case, genes from a different species).
One of these transgenes was a jellyfish gene that specifies
green fluorescent protein (GFP); the other was a gene from red
coral that makes red fluorescent protein (RFP) (Fig. A).
In the XX mice, the GFP gene is located on the X chromosome from the mother, and the RFP gene resides on the X
chromosome from the father. Clonal patches of cells are either green or red depending on which X chromosome was
turned into a Barr body in the original cell that established the
patch (Fig. B).
Different XX mice display different green and red patchwork
patterns, providing a clear demonstration of the random nature of
X chromosome inactivation. The patchwork patterns reflect the
cellular memory of which X chromosome was inactivated in the
founder cell for each clonal patch. Geneticists currently use these
transgenic mice to decipher the genetic details of how cells
“remember” which X to inactivate after each cell division.
.
GFP X M
RFP X P
Barr body
GFP X M
RFP X P
Barr body
Figure A Cells of transgenic mice glow either green  
or red in response to X chromosome inactivation. The
mouse carries a green (GFP) transgene inserted in the maternal
X chromosome (XM), and a red (RFP) transgene in the paternal
X chromosome (XP). Cells in which XP is inactivated (top) glow
green; cells glow red (bottom) when XM is inactivated.
Figure B Heart cells of a transgenic mouse reveal a 
clonal patchwork of X inactivation. Patches of red or
green cells represent cellular descendants of the founders
that randomly inactivated one of their X chromosomes.
© Hao Wu and Jeremy Nathans, Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Neuroscience, and HHMI, Johns Hopkins Medical School.
Maleness and Male Fertility Are the Only
Known Y-Linked Traits in Humans
Theoretically, phenotypes caused by mutations on the Y
chromosome should also be identifiable by pedigree analysis. Such traits would pass from an affected father to all of
his sons, and from them to all future male descendants.
Females would neither exhibit nor transmit a Y-linked phenotype (see Table 4.5). However, besides the determination
of maleness itself, as well as contributions to sperm formation and thus male fertility, no clear-cut Y-linked visible
traits have turned up in humans. The paucity of known Ylinked traits reflects the fact that, as mentioned earlier, the
small Y chromosome contains very few genes. Indeed, one
would expect the Y chromosome to have only a limited effect on phenotype because normal XX females do perfectly
well without it.
Autosomal Genes Contribute
to Sexual Dimorphism
Not all genes that produce sexual dimorphism (differences
in the two sexes) reside on the X or Y chromosomes. Some
autosomal genes govern traits that appear in one sex but
not the other, or traits that are expressed differently in the
two sexes.
Sex-limited traits affect a structure or process that
is found in one sex but not the other. Mutations in genes
for sex-limited traits can influence only the phenotype of
the sex that expresses those structures or processes. A
vivid example of a sex-limited trait occurs in Drosophila
males homozygous for an autosomal recessive mutation
known as stuck, which affects the ability of mutant males
to retract their penis and release the claspers by which
they hold on to female genitalia during copulation. The
mutant males have difficulty separating from females after mating. In extreme cases, both individuals die, forever caught in their embrace. Because females lack
penises and claspers, homozygous stuck mutant females
can mate normally.
Sex-influenced traits show up in both sexes, but the
expression of such traits may differ between the two sexes
because of hormonal differences. Pattern baldness, a condition in which hair is lost prematurely from the top
of the head but not from the sides (Fig. 4.26), is a sexinfluenced trait in humans. Although pattern baldness is a
complex trait that can be affected by many genes, an autosomal gene appears to play an important role in certain
families. Men in these families who are heterozygous for
the balding allele lose their hair while still in their 20s,
whereas heterozygous women do not show any significant hair loss. In contrast, homozygotes in both sexes become bald (though the onset of baldness in homozygous
women is usually much later in life than in homozygous
men). This sex-influenced trait is thus dominant in men,
recessive in women.
Mutations in Sex Determination
Pathway Genes Can Result in
Intersexuality Disorders
We previously saw that the SRY gene on the Y chromosome
is essential to maleness because it initiates testis development early in embryogenesis. But the functions of many
genes are required for testis development, or for subsequent
events that rely on hormones made in the testes for the development of sexual organs. Some of these genes are autosomal and some are X-linked; in either case, an XY
individual with mutant alleles for any of these genes may
have unusual intersexual phenotypes.
In one important example, XY people with nonfunctional mutant alleles of the X-linked AR gene specifying
the androgen receptor have a disorder known as complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS). These XY individuals have testes that make the hormone testosterone, but in the absence of the androgen receptor to
which it binds, the testosterone has no effect. Without the
androgen receptor, these people cannot develop male genitalia (penis and scrotum) nor male internal duct systems
(the vas deferens, seminal vesicles, and ejaculatory ducts);
instead, their external genitalia assume the default female
state (labia and clitoris). However, the testes make another
hormone that prevents the formation of female internal
duct systems (including the fallopian tubes, uterus, and
vagina). The result is that persons with CAIS are externally female but sterile because they lack the internal duct
systems of either sex.
essential concepts
• Sex-linked (X-linked) traits show sex-specific inheritance
patterns because sons always inherit their father’s Y
chromosome, while daughters always inherit their father’s
X chromosome.
• Random inactivation of either the maternal or paternal
X chromosome in XX cells ensures that male and female
mammalian cells express equivalent amounts of the
proteins encoded by most X-linked genes.
• Mutations of genes—whether autosomal or X-linked—can
have different effects in males and females.
Figure 4.26 Male pattern baldness, a sex-influenced trait.
(a) John Adams (1735–1826), second president of the United
States, at about age 60. (b) John Quincy Adams (1767–1848), son
of John Adams and the sixth president of the United States, at
about the same age. The father-to-son transmission suggests that
male pattern baldness in the Adams family is likely determined by
an allele of an autosomal gene.
a: © Bettmann/Corbis; b: © The Corcoran Gallery of Art/Corbis
WHAT’S NEXT
T. H. Morgan and his students, collectively known as the
Drosophila group, acknowledged that Mendelian genetics
could exist independently of chromosomes. “Why then, we
are often asked, do you drag in the chromosomes? Our answer is that because the chromosomes furnish exactly the
kind of mechanism that Mendelian laws call for, and since
there is an ever-increasing body of information that points
clearly to the chromosomes as the bearers of the Mendelian
factors, it would be folly to close one’s eyes to so patent a
relation. Moreover, as biologists, we are interested in heredity not primarily as a mathematical formulation, but rather
as a problem concerning the cell, the egg, and the sperm.”
The Drosophila group went on to find several Xlinked mutations in addition to white eyes. One made the body yellow instead of brown, another shortened the
wings, yet another made bent instead of straight body
bristles. These findings raised several compelling questions. First, if the genes for all of these traits are physically
linked together on the X chromosome, does this linkage
affect their ability to assort independently, and if so, how?
Second, does each gene have an exact chromosomal
address, and if so, does this specific location in any way
affect its transmission? In Chapter 5 we describe how the
Drosophila group and others analyzed the transmission
patterns of genes on the same chromosome in terms of
known chromosome movements during meiosis, and how
they then used the information obtained to localize genes
to specific chromosomal positions.
SOLVED PROBLEMS
In humans, chromosome 16 sometimes has a heavily
stained area in the long arm near the centromere. This
feature can be seen through the microscope but has no
effect on the phenotype of the person carrying it.
When such a “blob” exists on a particular copy of
chromosome 16, it is a constant feature of that chromosome and is inherited.
A couple conceived a child, but the fetus had
multiple abnormalities and was miscarried. When the
chromosomes of the fetus were studied, it was discovered that it had three copies of chromosome 16 (it was
trisomic for chromosome 16), and that two of the
three chromosome 16s had large blobs. Both chromosome 16 homologs in the mother lacked blobs,
but the father was heterozygous for blobs. Which parent experienced nondisjunction, and in which meiotic
division did it occur?
Answer
This problem requires an understanding of nondisjunction
during meiosis. When individual chromosomes contain
some distinguishing feature that allows one homolog to be
distinguished from another, it is possible to follow the path
of the two homologs through meiosis. Because the fetus
had two chromosome 16s with the blob, we can conclude that the extra chromosome came from the father (the only
parent with a blobbed chromosome).
We know that nondisjunction must be involved because
normal meiosis in the father would generate gametes with
only a single chromosome 16 with the blob; as a result, the
fetus could have only a single chromosome 16 with the blob.
Meiosis I
Normal meiosis in father
Meiosis II Gametes
In which meiotic division did the nondisjunction occur? When nondisjunction occurs during meiosis I, homologs fail to segregate to opposite poles. If this occurred in
the father, the chromosome with the blob and the normal
chromosome 16 would segregate into the same cell (a secondary spermatocyte). After meiosis II, the gametes resulting from this cell would carry both types of chromosomes.
If such sperm fertilized a normal egg, the zygote would
have two copies of the normal chromosome 16 and one
copy of the chromosome with a blob.
On the other hand, if nondisjunction occurred during
meiosis II in the father in a secondary spermatocyte containing the blobbed chromosome 16, sperm with two copies of the blob-marked chromosome would be produced.
After fertilization with a normal egg, the result would be a
zygote of the type seen in this spontaneous abortion.
Meiosis I
NDJ in meiosis II
Fertilization
Mother’s gamete Father’s gamete
Meiosis II Gametes
Fetus
Therefore, the nondisjunction occurred in meiosis II in
the father.
II. (a) What sex ratio would you expect among the offspring of a cross between a normal male mouse and a
female mouse heterozygous for a recessive X-linked
lethal gene? (b) What would be the expected sex ratio
among the offspring of a cross between a normal hen
and a rooster heterozygous for a recessive Z-linked
lethal allele?
Answer
This problem deals with sex-linked inheritance and sex
determination.
a. Mice have a sex determination system of XX = female and XY = male. A normal male mouse (XRY)
× a heterozygous female mouse (XRXr) would result
in XRXR, XRXr, XRY, and XrY mice. The XrY mice
would die, so there would be a 2:1 ratio of females
to males.
b. The sex determination system in birds is ZZ = male
and ZW = female. A normal hen (ZRW) × a heterozygous rooster (ZRZr) would result in ZRZR, ZRZr,
ZRW, and ZrW chickens. Because the ZrW offspring
do not live, the ratio of females to males would
be 1:2.
III. A woman with normal color vision whose father was
color-blind mates with a man with normal color
vision.
a. What do you expect to see among their offspring?
b. What would you expect if it was the normal man’s
father who was color-blind?
Answer
This problem involves sex-linked inheritance.
a. The woman’s father has a genotype of XcbY. Because
the woman had to inherit an X from her father, she
must have an Xcb chromosome, but because she has
normal color vision, her other X chromosome must be
XCB. The man she mates with has normal color vision
and therefore has an XCBY genotype. Their children
could with equal probability be XCBXCB (normal female), XCBXcb (carrier female), XCBY (normal male),
or XcbY (color-blind male).
b. If the man with normal color vision had a color-blind
father, the Xcb chromosome would not have been
passed on to him, because a male does not inherit
an X chromosome from his father. The man has the
genotype XCBY and cannot pass on the color-blind
allele.
Vocabulary
1. Choose the best matching phrase in the right column
for each of the terms in the left column.
a. meiosis 1. X and Y
b. gametes 2. chromosomes that do not differ
between the sexes
c. karyotype 3. one of the two identical halves
of a replicated chromosome
d. mitosis 4. microtubule organizing centers
at the spindle poles
e. interphase 5. cells in the testes that undergo
meiosis
f. syncytium 6. division of the cytoplasm
g. synapsis 7. haploid germ cells that unite
at fertilization
h. sex chromosomes 8. an animal cell containing more
than one nucleus
i. cytokinesis 9. pairing of homologous
chromosomes
j. anaphase 10. one diploid cell gives rise to two
diploid cells
k. chromatid 11. the array of chromosomes in a
given cell
l. autosomes 12. the part of the cell cycle during
which the chromosomes are not
visible
m. centromere 13. one diploid cell gives rise to four
haploid cells
n. centrosomes 14. cell produced by meiosis that
does not become a gamete
o. polar body 15. the time during mitosis when
sister chromatids separate
p. spermatocytes 16. site of the closest connection
between sister chromatids
Section 4.1
2. Humans have 46 chromosomes in each somatic cell.
a. How many chromosomes does a child receive from
its father?
b. How many autosomes and how many sex chromosomes are present in each somatic cell?
c. How many chromosomes are present in a human
ovum?
d. How many sex chromosomes are present in a
human ovum?
Section 4.2
3. The figure that follows shows the metaphase chromosomes of a male of a particular species. These chromosomes are prepared as they would be for a
karyotype, but they have not yet been ordered in
pairs of decreasing size.
a. How many chromosomes are shown?
b. How many chromatids are shown?
c. How many centromeres are shown? (Count each
sister centromere separately.)
d. How many pairs of homologous chromosomes are
shown?
e. How many chromosomes on the figure are
metacentric? Acrocentric?
f. What is the likely mode of sex determination in
this species? What would you predict to be different about the karyotype of a female in this
species?
4. Human XX males who are sex-reversed because they
have a mutant X chromosome like that shown in
Fig. 4.7 often learn of their condition when they want
to have children and discover that they are sterile. Can
you explain why they are sterile?
5. Researchers discovered recently that the sole function
of the SRY protein is to activate an autosomal gene
called Sox9 in the presumptive gonad (before it has
“decided” to become a testis or an ovary).
a. What would be the sex of an XY individual homozygous for nonfunctional mutant alleles of Sox9?
Explain.
b. Given your answer to part (a), why is SRY, rather
than Sox9, considered the male determining factor?
(Hint: What do you think would happen if you did
an experiment like the one in the Fast Forward Box
Transgenic Mice Prove That SRY Is the Maleness
Factor, except that you used a Sox9 transgene
instead of SRY?)
Section 4.3
6. One oak tree cell with 14 chromosomes undergoes
mitosis. How many daughter cells are formed, and
what is the chromosome number in each cell?
Indicate which of the cells numbered i–v matches
each of the following stages of mitosis:
a. anaphase
b. prophase
c. metaphase
d. G2
e. telophase/cytokinesis
i.
iv.
ii. iii.
v.
8. a. What are the four major stages of the cell cycle?
b. Which stages are included in interphase?
c. What events distinguish G1, S, and G2?
9. Answer the questions that follow for each stage of the
cell cycle (G1, S, G2, prophase, metaphase, anaphase,
telophase). If necessary, use an arrow to indicate a
change that occurs during a particular cell cycle stage
(for example, 1 → 2 or yes → no).
a. How many chromatids make up each chromosome
during this stage?
b. Is the nucleolus present?
c. Is the mitotic spindle organized?
d. Is the nuclear membrane present?
10. Can you think of anything that would prevent mitosis
from occurring in a cell whose genome is haploid?
Section 4.4
11. One oak tree cell with 14 chromosomes undergoes
meiosis. How many cells will result from this process, and what is the chromosome number in each
cell?
12. Which type(s) of cell division (mitosis, meiosis I,
meiosis II) reduce(s) the chromosome number by
half? Which type(s) of cell division can be classified
as reductional? Which type(s) of cell division can be
classified as equational?
13. Complete the following statements using as many of
the following terms as are appropriate: mitosis, meiosis I (first meiotic division), meiosis II (second meiotic
division), and none (not mitosis nor meiosis I nor
meiosis II).
a. The spindle apparatus is present in cells undergoing
_____.
b. Chromosome replication occurs just prior to _____.
c. The cells resulting from _____ in a haploid cell
have a ploidy of n.
d. The cells resulting from _____ in a diploid cell
have a ploidy of n.
e. Homologous chromosome pairing regularly occurs
during _____.
f. Nonhomologous chromosome pairing regularly
occurs during _____.
g. Physical recombination leading to the production
of recombinant progeny classes occurs during
_____.
h. The separation of sister centromeres occurs during
_____.
i. Nonsister chromatids are found in the same cell
during _____.
14. The five cells shown in figures a–e are all from the same
individual. For each cell, indicate whether it is in mitosis,
meiosis I, or meiosis II. What stage of cell division is
represented in each case? What is n in this organism?
a. d.
b.
c.
e.
15. One of the first microscopic observations of chromosomes in cell division was published in 1905 by
Nettie Stevens. Because it was hard to reproduce photographs at the time, she recorded these observations
as camera lucida sketches. One such drawing, of a
completely normal cell division in the mealworm
Tenebrio molitor, is shown here. The techniques of
the time were relatively unsophisticated by today’s
standards, and they did not allow her to resolve chromosomal structures that must have been present.
a. Describe in as much detail as possible the kind of
cell division and the stage of division depicted in
the drawing.
What chromosomal structure(s) cannot be resolved
in the drawing?
c. How many chromosomes are present in normal
Tenebrio molitor gametes?
16. A person is simultaneously heterozygous for two autosomal genetic traits. One is a recessive condition for
albinism (alleles A and a); this albinism gene is found
near the centromere on the long arm of an acrocentric
autosome. The other trait is the dominantly inherited
Huntington disease (alleles HD and HD+). The
Huntington gene is located near the telomere of one
of the arms of a metacentric autosome. Draw all copies of the two relevant chromosomes in this person as
they would appear during metaphase of (a) mitosis,
(b) meiosis I, and (c) meiosis II. In each figure, label
the location on every chromatid of the alleles for
these two genes, assuming that no recombination
takes place.
17. Assuming (i) that the two chromosomes in every
homologous pair carry different alleles of some
genes, and (ii) that no crossing-over takes place, how
many genetically different offspring could any one
human couple potentially produce? Which of these
two assumptions (i or ii) is more realistic?
18. In the moss Polytrichum commune, the haploid
chromosome number is 7. A haploid male gamete
fuses with a haploid female gamete to form a diploid cell that divides and develops into the multicellular sporophyte. Cells of the sporophyte then
undergo meiosis to produce haploid cells called
spores. What is the probability that an individual
spore will contain a set of chromosomes all of
which came from the male gamete? (Assume that
no recombination occurs.)
19. Can you think of anything that would prevent meiosis
from occurring in an organism whose genome is
always haploid?
20. Sister chromatids are held together through metaphase of mitosis by complexes of cohesin proteins
that form rubber band–like rings bundling the two
sister chromatids. Cohesin rings are found both at
centromeres and at many locations scattered along
the length of the chromosomes. The rings are
destroyed by protease enzymes at the beginning of
mitotic anaphase, allowing the sister chromatids to
separate.
a. Cohesin complexes between sister chromatids are
also responsible for keeping homologous chromosomes together until anaphase of meiosis I. With
this point in mind, which of the two diagrams that
follow (i or ii) properly represents the arrangement
of chromatids during prophase through metaphase
of meiosis I? Explain.   
What does your answer to part (a) allow you to
infer about the nature of cohesin complexes at the
centromere versus those along the chromosome
arms? Suggest a molecular hypothesis to explain
your inference.
i ii
21. The pseudoautosomal regions (PARs) of the X and Y
chromosomes enable the sex chromosomes to pair and
synapse during meiosis in males. Given the location of
the SRY gene near PAR1, can you propose a mechanism for how the mutant X and Y chromosomes in
Fig. 4.7 (in which part of the X is on the Y, and part of
the Y is on the X) may have arisen during meiosis?
22. Remarkably, the platypus has 10 sex chromosomes,
the largest number found in any mammal. The female
platypus has five pairs of different X chromosomes
(X1–X5), while the male has X1–X5, and also five
different Ys (Y1–Y5). During meiosis in the male, the
five Xs always end up together in one gamete, and the
five Ys always end up together in another gamete. To
achieve this segregation, during prophase of meiosis I
the sex chromosomes form a long chain, always in the
order X1 Y1 X2 Y2 X3 Y3 X4 Y4 X5 Y5, in which
the chromosomes are held together through pseudoautosomal regions (PARs).
a. How many different PARs must exist to allow the
formation of these chains? (Hint: To answer this
question, try drawing the chain of chromosomes.)
b. In terms of pairing ability of the PARs, explain
the structural differences between the human and
platypus sex chromosomes.
Section 4.5
23. Somatic cells of chimpanzees contain 48 chromosomes.
How many chromatids and chromosomes are present at: (a) anaphase of mitosis, (b) anaphase I of
meiosis, (c) anaphase II of meiosis, (d) G1 prior
to mitosis, (e) G2 prior to mitosis, (f) G1 prior to
meiosis I, and (g) prophase of meiosis I?
How many chromatids or chromosomes are present
in: (h) an oogonial cell prior to S phase, (i) a spermatid, (j) a primary oocyte arrested prior to ovulation,
(k) a secondary oocyte arrested prior to fertilization,
(l) a second polar body, and (m) a chimpanzee sperm?
24. In humans:
a. How many sperm develop from 100 primary
spermatocytes?
b. How many sperm develop from 100 secondary
spermatocytes?
c. How many sperm develop from 100 spermatids?
d. How many ova develop from 100 primary oocytes?
e. How many ova develop from 100 secondary
oocytes?
f. How many ova develop from 100 polar bodies?
25. Women sometimes develop benign tumors called
ovarian teratomas or dermoid cysts in their ovaries.
Such a tumor begins when a primary oocyte escapes
from its prophase I arrest and finishes meiosis I
within the ovary. (Normally meiosis I does not finish until the primary oocyte is expelled from the
ovary upon ovulation.) The secondary oocyte then
develops as if it were an embryo. Development is
disorganized, however, and results in a tumor
containing differentiated diploid tissues, including
teeth, hair, bone, muscle, and nerve. If a dermoid
cyst forms in a woman whose genotype is Aa, what
are the possible genotypes of the cyst, assuming no
recombination?
26. In a certain strain of turkeys, unfertilized eggs sometimes develop parthenogenetically to produce diploid
offspring. (Females have ZW and males have ZZ sex
chromosomes. Assume that WW cells are inviable.)
What distribution of sexes would you expect to see
among the parthenogenetic offspring according to
each of the following models for how parthenogenesis
occurs?
a. The eggs develop from oogonial cells that never
undergo meiosis.
b. The eggs go all the way through meiosis and then
duplicate their chromosomes to become diploid.
c. The eggs go through meiosis I, and the chromatids
separate to create diploidy.
d. The egg goes all the way through meiosis and then
fuses at random with one of its three polar bodies
(this scenario assumes the first polar body goes
through meiosis II).
Section 4.6
27. Imagine you have two pure-breeding lines of canaries,
one with yellow feathers and the other with brown
feathers. In crosses between these two strains, yellow
female × brown male gives only brown sons and
daughters, while brown female × yellow male gives
only brown sons and yellow daughters. Propose a
hypothesis to explain these results.
28. A system of sex determination known as haplodiploidy is found in honeybees. Females are diploid, and
males (drones) are haploid. Male offspring result
from the development of unfertilized eggs. Sperm are
produced by mitosis in males and fertilize eggs in the
females. Ivory eye is a recessive characteristic in
honeybees; wild-type eyes are brown.
a. What progeny would result from an ivory-eyed
queen and a brown-eyed drone? Give both genotype and phenotype for progeny produced from
fertilized and nonfertilized eggs.
b. What would result from crossing a daughter from
the mating in part (a) with a brown-eyed drone?
29. In Drosophila, the autosomal recessive brown eye
color mutation displays interactions with both the
X-linked recessive vermilion mutation and the autosomal recessive scarlet mutation. Flies homozygous for brown and simultaneously hemizygous or
homozygous for vermilion have white eyes. Flies
simultaneously homozygous for both the brown and
scarlet mutations also have white eyes. Predict the
F1 and F2 progeny of crossing the following truebreeding parents:
a. vermilion females × brown males
b. brown females × vermilion males
c. scarlet females × brown males
d. brown females × scarlet males
30. Barred feather pattern is a Z-linked dominant trait
in chickens. What offspring would you expect from
(a) the cross of a barred hen to a nonbarred rooster?
(b) the cross of an F1 rooster from part (a) to one of
his sisters?
31. When Calvin Bridges observed a large number of offspring from a cross of white-eyed female Drosophila to
red-eyed males, he found very rare white-eyed females
and red-eyed males among the offspring. He was able
to show that these exceptions resulted from nondisjunction, such that the white-eyed females had received two
Xs from the egg and a Y from the sperm, while the
red-eyed males had received no sex chromosome from
the egg and an X from the sperm. What progeny would
have arisen from these same kinds of nondisjunctional
events if they had occurred in the male parent? What
would their eye colors have been?
32. In a vial of Drosophila, a research student noticed
several female flies (but no male flies) with bag wings
each consisting of a large, liquid-filled blister instead
of the usual smooth wing blade. When bag-winged
females were crossed with wild-type males, 1/3 of the
progeny were bag-winged females, 1/3 were normalwinged females, and 1/3 were normal-winged males.
Explain these results.
In 1919, Calvin Bridges began studying an X-linked
recessive mutation causing eosin-colored eyes in
Drosophila. Within an otherwise true-breeding
culture of eosin-eyed flies, he noticed rare variants
that had much lighter cream-colored eyes. By intercrossing these variants, he was able to make a truebreeding cream-eyed stock. Bridges now crossed
males from this cream-eyed stock with true-breeding
wild-type females. All the F1 progeny had red (wildtype) eyes. When F1 flies were intercrossed, the F2
progeny were 104 females with red eyes, 52 males
with red eyes, 44 males with eosin eyes, and
14 males with cream eyes. Assume that these
numbers represent an 8:4:3:1 ratio.
a. Formulate a hypothesis to explain the F1 and F2
results, assigning phenotypes to all possible
genotypes.
b. What do you predict in the F1 and F2 generations if the parental cross is between truebreeding eosin-eyed males and true-breeding
cream-eyed females?
c. What do you predict in the F1 and F2 generations
if the parental cross is between true-breeding
eosin-eyed females and true-breeding creameyed males?
34. In Drosophila, a cross was made between a yellowbodied male with vestigial (not fully developed)
wings and a wild-type female (brown body). The F1
generation consisted of wild-type males and wild-type
females. F1 males and females were crossed, and the
F2 progeny consisted of 16 yellow-bodied males with
vestigial wings, 48 yellow-bodied males with normal
wings, 15 males with brown bodies and vestigial
wings, 49 wild-type males, 31 brown-bodied females
with vestigial wings, and 97 wild-type females.
Explain the inheritance of the two genes in question
based on these results.
35. As we learned in this chapter, the white mutation of
Drosophila studied by Thomas Hunt Morgan is
X-linked and recessive to wild type. When truebreeding white-eyed males carrying this mutation
were crossed with true-breeding purple-eyed females,
all the F1 progeny had wild-type (red) eyes. When the
F1 progeny were intercrossed, the F2 progeny emerged
in the ratio 3/8 wild-type females: 1/4 white-eyed
males: 3/16 wild-type males: 1/8 purple-eyed females:
1/16 purple-eyed males.
a. Formulate a hypothesis to explain the inheritance
of these eye colors.
b. Predict the F1 and F2 progeny if the parental cross
was reversed (that is, if the parental cross was
between true-breeding white-eyed females and
true-breeding purple-eyed males).
Section 4.7
36. The following is a pedigree of a family in which a
rare form of color blindness is found (filled-in
symbols). Indicate as much as you can about the
genotypes of all the individuals in the pedigree.
I
II
III
21
1 3 2 4
1 432
37. Each of the four pedigrees that follow represents a
human family within which a genetic disease is
segregating. Affected individuals are indicated by
filled-in symbols. One of the diseases is transmitted
as an autosomal recessive condition, one as an
X-linked recessive, one as an autosomal dominant,
and one as an X-linked dominant. Assume all four
traits are rare in the population and completely
penetrant.
a. Indicate which pedigree represents which mode of
inheritance, and explain how you know.
b. For each pedigree, what would you tell the parents
about the chance that their child (indicated by the
hexagon shape) will have the condition?
Pedigree 1
1
1 2 3 4 5
2
1
1
2 3 4 5 6
1
1
2 3 4 5 6
1 2
1
1
2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2
1 2
Pedigree 2
Pedigree 3
Pedigree 4
38. The pedigree that follows indicates the occurrence
of albinism in a group of Hopi Indians, among
whom the trait is unusually frequent. Assume that
the trait is fully penetrant (all individuals with a
genotype that could give rise to albinism will display
this condition).
a. Is albinism in this population caused by a recessive
or a dominant allele?
b. Is the gene sex-linked or autosomal?
Chapter 4 The Chromosome Theory of Inheritance
40. The X-linked gene responsible for DMD encodes a protein called dystrophin that is required for muscle function. Dystrophin protein is not secreted—it remains in
the cells that produce it. Given what you know about
Barr body formation, do you think that females heterozygous for the recessive DMD disease allele could have
the disease in some parts of their bodies and not others?
41. Males have hemophilia when they are hemizygous for
a nonfunctional recessive mutant allele of the X-linked
gene for clotting factor VIII. Factor VIII is normally
secreted into the blood serum by cells in the bone
marrow (and other specialized cells) that produce it.
a. Do you think that females heterozygous for the
hemophilia disease allele could have hemophilia
in some parts of their bodies and not others?
b. If such a female carrier of hemophilia suffered a
cut, would her blood coagulate (form clots) faster,
slower, or in about the same time as that of an individual homozygous for a normal allele of the factor
VIII gene? Would the rate of clotting vary significantly among heterozygous females?
42. In the Fast Forward Box Visualizing X Chromosome
Inactivation in Transgenic Mice, suppose the investigators had looked at the expression of green and red fluorescent protein in early mouse embryos, when the
embryos have fewer than 500 cells. What patterns would
they likely have observed? (Assume that the transgenes
make gene product this early in development.)
43. The following pedigree shows five generations of a family
that exhibits congenital hypertrichosis, a rare condition in
which affected individuals are born with unusually abundant amounts of hair on their faces and upper bodies. The
two small black dots in the pedigree indicate miscarriages.
a. What can you conclude about the inheritance of
hypertrichosis in this family, assuming complete
penetrance of the trait?
b. On what basis can you exclude other modes of
inheritance?
c. With how many fathers did III-2 and III-9 have
children?
What are the genotypes of the following individuals?
c. individual I-1
d. individual I-8
e. individual I-9
f. individual II-6
g. individual II-8
h. individual III-4

39. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is caused by a
relatively rare X-linked recessive allele. It results in
progressive muscular wasting and usually leads to
death before age 20. In this problem, an affected
person is one with the severe form of DMD caused by
hemizygosity or homozygosity for the disease allele.
a. What is the probability that the first son of a
woman whose brother is affected will be affected?
b. What is the probability that the second son of a
woman whose brother is affected will be affected,
if her first son was affected?
c. What is the probability that a child of an unaffected
man whose brother is affected will be affected?
d. An affected man mates with his unaffected first
cousin; there is otherwise no history of DMD in
this family. If the mothers of this man and his mate
were sisters, what is the probability that the
couple’s first child will be an affected boy? An
affected girl? An unaffected child?
e. If the two related parents of the couple in part (d)
were brother and sister (instead of sisters), what is
the probability that the couple’s first child will be an
affected boy? An affected girl? An unaffected child?
Consider the following pedigrees from human families containing a male with Klinefelter syndrome (a
set of abnormalities seen in XXY individuals; indicated with shaded boxes). In each, A and B refer to
codominant alleles of the X-linked G6PD gene. The
phenotypes of each individual (A, B, or AB) are
shown on the pedigree. Indicate if nondisjunction
occurred in the mother or father of the son with
Klinefelter syndrome for each of the three examples.
Can you tell if the nondisjunction was in the first or
second meiotic division?
a.
b.
c.
A
B A
AB AB AB
AB
A A
A
A
B
AB
45. Several different antigens can be detected in blood
tests. The following four traits were tested for each
individual shown:
ABO type (I A and I B codominant, i recessive)
Rh type (Rh+ dominant to Rh−)
MN type (M and N codominant)
Xg(a) type [Xg(a+) dominant to Xg(a−)]
All of these blood type genes are autosomal, except
for Xg(a), which is X-linked.
Mother AB Rh− MN Xg(a+)
Daughter A Rh+ MN Xg(a−)
Alleged father 1 AB Rh+ M Xg(a+)
Alleged father 2 A Rh− N Xg(a−)
Alleged father 3 B Rh+ N Xg(a−)
Alleged father 4 O Rh− MN Xg(a−)
a. Which, if any, of the alleged fathers could be the
real father?
b. Would your answer to part (a) change if the
daughter had Turner syndrome (the abnormal
phenotype seen in XO individuals)? If so, how?
46. The ancestry of a white female tiger bred in a city zoo
is depicted in the pedigree following part (e) of this
problem. White tigers are indicated with unshaded
symbols. (As you can see, there was considerable
inbreeding in this lineage. For example, the white tiger
Mohan was mated with his daughter.) In answering the
following questions, assume that white is determined
by allelic differences at a single gene and that the trait
is fully penetrant. Explain your answers by citing the
relevant information in the pedigree.
a. Could white coat color be caused by a Y-linked allele?
b. Could white coat color be caused by a dominant
X-linked allele?
c. Could white coat color be caused by a dominant
autosomal allele?
d. Could white coat color be caused by a recessive
X-linked allele?
e. Could white coat color be caused by a recessive
autosomal allele?
Mohan
Mohini
Kesari Tony
Kamala Bim Sumita
1982 female
47. The pedigree that follows shows the inheritance
of various types of cancer in a particular family.
Molecular analyses (described in subsequent chapters) indicate that with one exception, the cancers
occurring in the patients in this pedigree are associated with a rare mutation in a gene called BRCA2.
a. Which individual is the exceptional cancer patient
whose disease is not associated with a BRCA2
mutation?
b. Is the BRCA2 mutation dominant or recessive to the
normal BRCA2 allele in terms of its cancer-causing
effects?
c. Is the BRCA2 gene likely to reside on the X chromosome, the Y chromosome, or an autosome? How
definitive is your assignment of the chromosome
carrying BRCA2?
Deceased
Breast cancer
Ovarian cancer and deceased
Other cancer and deceased
d. Is the penetrance of the cancer phenotype complete
or incomplete?
e. Is the expressivity of the cancer phenotype unvarying or variable?
f. Are any of the cancer phenotypes associated with
the BRCA2 mutation sex-limited or sex-influenced?
g. How can you explain the absence of individuals
diagnosed with cancer in generations I and II?
48. In 1995, doctors reported a Chinese family in which
retinitis pigmentosa (progressive degeneration of the
retina leading to blindness) affected only males. All
six sons of affected males were affected, but all of the
five daughters of affected males (and all of the
children of these daughters) were unaffected.
a. What is the likelihood that this form of retinitis
pigmentosa is due to an autosomal mutation
showing complete dominance?
b. What other possibilities could explain the inheritance of retinitis pigmentosa in this family? Which
of these possibilities do you think is most likely?
49. In cats, the dominant O allele of the X-linked orange
gene is required to produce orange fur; the recessive o
allele of this gene yields black fur. Tortoiseshell cats
have coats with patches of orange fur alternating
with patterns of black fur. Approximately 90% of all
tortoiseshell cats are females.
a. Explain why tortoiseshell cats are nearly always
female.
b. What types of crosses would be expected to
produce female tortoiseshell cats?
c. Suggest a hypothesis to explain the origin of male
tortoiseshell cats.
d. Calico cats (most of which are females) have
patches of white, orange, and black fur. Suggest a
hypothesis for the origin of calico cats.
50. In marsupials like the opposum or kangaroo, X inactivation selectively inactivates the paternal X chromosome.
a. Predict the possible coat colors of the progeny of
both sexes if a female marsupial homozygous for a
mutant allele of an X-linked coat color gene was
mated with a male hemizygous for the alternative
wild-type alleles of this gene.
b. Predict the possible coat colors of progeny of both
sexes if a male marsupial hemizygous for an allele
of an X-linked coat color gene was mated with a
female homozygous for the alternative wild-type
allele of this gene.
c. Why are the terms recessive and dominant not useful in describing the alleles of X-linked coat color
genes in marsupials?
d. Why would marsupials heterozygous for two
alleles of an X-linked coat color gene not have
patches of fur of two different colors as did the tortoiseshell cats described in the previous problem?
51. The pedigree diagram below shows a family in which
many individuals are affected by a disease called LeriWeill dyschondrosteosis (LWD). People with LWD
are short in stature due to leg bone deformities; arm
bones are also malformed in some individuals. The
mutant gene responsible for LWD was identified in
1998 as SHOX, a gene located in a pseudoautosomal
region (PAR1) of the X and Y chromosomes.
a. Is the SHOX allele that causes LWD dominant or
recessive? Explain. (Note: Sex reversal is not involved.)
b. Even though SHOX is located on the X chromosome, the pedigree is atypical for an X-linked
allele. What features of the pedigree are incompatible
with X-linkage?
c. For each affected individual in the pedigree, determine
whether the SHOX disease allele is on the X or the Y.
d. Explain the inheritance pattern of the SHOX disease
allele and the SHOX+ normal allele in pedigree.
e. Diagram the crossover event that generated the Y chromosome in individual III-5. Your diagram should indicate the positions of the SHOX (disease) and SHOX+
(normal) alleles on the X and Y chromosomes in the
germ-line cells of individual II-3, and SRY+ on Y.


